welcome to the huberman Lab podcast  where we discuss science and  science-based tools for everyday life  I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor  of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at  Stanford school of medicine today my  guest is Tim Ferris Tim Ferriss is an  author a podcaster an investor and is  known for having a near Supernatural  ability to predict the future which has  allowed him to obtain success in a huge  number of different Endeavors for  instance he is a five-time number one  New York Times best-selling author  but perhaps equally or more important to  that he's also exceptionally good at  teaching people how to write the entire  process of writing and marketing a book  his books the four-hour chef and the  four-hour body and the four hour work  week not only explain his own  exploration of how to optimize and  prioritize his time and learn particular  skills but he teaches you those skills  as well this is really what sets him  apart he is an exceptional learner and  an exceptional teacher and today you  learn why that is and in a  characteristic Tim Ferriss way he  explains the process in a way that you  can apply it he lists out for instance  the specific questions that you should  ask When approaching any Endeavor in  order to get the information that you  want and to make the process of learning  and getting better at something and  achieving great success in something  that much more likely that ability that  Tim has to identify the specific  questions that one needs to ask and  answer and the specific action steps to  take in order to achieve success is  really what I believe sets Tim apart  from everyone else on the Internet or on  the bookshelf that's giving advice as to  how to become good at something  Tim Ferriss is also dedicated to various  philanthropic efforts the most recent of  which is the donation of several  millions of his own dollars to research  on psychedelics for the treatment of  otherwise intractable psychiatric  challenges such as major depression  suicidal depression eating disorders and  addiction and he's also brought together  other philanthropists which has really  galvanized the whole field of  psychedelic research for the treatment  of mental health transforming it from  what was recently kind of a fringe area  of science to a Mainstay that's actually  funded not only by philanthropy but by  the National Institutes of Health so  he's really transformed this entire  scientific field into one that now is  transforming the laws around  psychedelics and is providing mental  health treatment for people that would  otherwise suffer today's discussion was  a particularly meaningful one because  not only is Tim a Pioneer in the world  of podcasting but it also marked the  nine-year anniversary of his podcast the  Tim Ferriss show now as I mentioned  earlier Tim is known for being able to  see around corners or predict the future  he really does seem to be about five if  not 10 years ahead of everybody else in  thinking about tools for optimization in  particular domains of life and so we  were very fortunate that during today's  discussion he shares with us his current  creative Endeavors and how he's thinking  about and approaching those and he also  breaks down for us the process of how to  think about and prioritize one scheduled  not just on the order of the day not  just on the order of the week but really  thinking about one's life as a journey  and how to organize and go about that  Journey so today's discussion will  provide with you tremendous insight into  who Tim Ferriss is and how that  incredible mind of his Works in order to  do all the amazing things that he's done  and of course he teaches you how to do  it he will tell you the exact questions  that you should ask and  that you should answer and how to step  back and think about those questions and  then prioritize so that you can decide  how to best invest your time I'm sure  many of you are familiar with the Tim  Ferriss show however if you're not  already subscribing to the Tim Ferriss  show I highly recommend you do I still  go back and listen to early episodes of  the Tim Ferriss show and I'm a weekly  listener to the new episodes we provide  a link to the Tim Ferriss show in the  show note captions also in the show note  captions you'll find links to Tim's many  New York Times best-selling books and a  link to his excellent weekly blog before  we begin I'd like to emphasize that this  podcast is separate from my teaching and  research roles at Stanford it is however  part of my desire and effort to bring  zero cost to Consumer information about  science and science related tools to the  general public in keeping with that  theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of  today's podcast our first sponsor is  Maui Nui venison Maui Nui venison is the  most nutrient dense and delicious red  meat available I've talked before on  this podcast about the key importance of  striving to get one gram of protein per  pound of body weight now when one  strives to do that it's also important  to maximize the quality protein to  calorie ratio in other words you don't  want to consume a lot of extra calories  in order to get your quality protein  Maui Nui venison in having an extremely  high quality protein and nutrient to  calorie ratio allows you to do that very  easily and in addition to that Maui Nui  venison is delicious I particularly like  their bone broth which has an unmatched  25 grams of protein per 100 calories I  also love their ground venison and their  venison steaks all of them are  absolutely delicious if you'd like to  try Maui Nui venison go to  mauinuyvenison.com huberman and get 20  off your first order again that's Maui  News venison.com huberman to get 20 off  today's episode is also brought To Us by  element element is an electrolyte drink  that has everything you need that is the  electrolytes sodium magnesium and  potassium but nothing you don't which  means no sugar it's critical that we get  electrolytes because every cell of our  body but in particular our nurse cells  our neurons rely on electrolytes in  order to function properly with element  it's very easy to ingest the correct  ratios of electrolytes that come in  these little packets they're really  delicious you mix them up with anywhere  from 8 to 16 to 32 ounces of fluid I  like mine pretty concentrated so I'll  drink a 16 ounce glass of water with  element in it when I first wake up I'll  also consume another one of those maybe  32 ounces with one packet when I  exercise and maybe another one if I  happen to sweat a lot during exercise or  if I was in the sauna and sweating lot  if it's a very hot day Etc if you'd like  to try element go to drink element  that's lmnt.com huberman to claim a free  element sample pack with your purchase  again that's drink element lmnt.com  huberman today's episode is also brought  To Us by levels levels is a program that  lets you see how different foods and  activities impact your blood glucose  levels or blood sugar levels as they're  sometimes referred to  with levels you can see how the specific  foods you eat when you eat and exercise  as well as any other activities impact  your blood glucose and how those affect  things like your energy level or your  quality of sleep or your level of  clarity and focus for mental work or  your physical output for physical  Endeavors I first started using levels  about a year ago as a way to understand  how different foods and activities  impact my blood glucose levels and it's  really impacted my entire schedule in  fact I've shuffled a number of things  around such that now I have more stable  energy throughout the day yes I  eliminated one or two Foods fortunately  they weren't my favorite foods I've also  added some new foods to my nutrition  program that have allowed my blood sugar  levels to remain much more steady  throughout the day and to achieve better  sleep at night levels even provides a  simple score after any meal you eat so  you can see how different foods affect  you and develop a personalized nutrition  program that's exactly right for you and  that's really what levels is about it's  really about tailoring things to your  specific needs so if you're interested  in learning more about levels and trying  a CGM yourself go to levels.link  huberman right now they're offering an  additional two free months of membership  again that's levels.link huberman and  now for my discussion with Tim Ferris  Tim Ferriss  I am nothing short of thrilled to have  you here  I've been reading your books reading  your blogs listening to your podcasts  for a very long time and in preparing  for today  I was thinking you know who does Tim  remind me of because I knew you reminded  me of somebody but I didn't know who and  then I realized it you remind me of the  neurobiologist ramoni kahal you don't  look anything like him  he doesn't look anything like you uh he  was a brilliant scientist he won the  Nobel Prize in 1906 for essentially  describing the structure of the nervous  system it was the first along with  another guy to Define synapses like this  fundamental connection the nervous  system but the reason that you remind me  of kahal  is that it's a well-known or not so  secret secret in Neuroscience that if  you want to pick a really excellent  project to work on you simply go and  look at what kahal  talked about or hypothesized  and then you work on that yeah he had  this almost  um  Supernatural ability to look at fixed  stained tissue of the nervous system  much of it is incredibly beautiful by  the way  and  think about how it worked when it was  alive and he's considered the greatest  neurobiologist of all time without  question  and  it's really this feature of being able  to like see around corners or into the  future that establishes that link for me  it's it's absolute truth that if you  look back to what you were doing 10  years ago 15 years ago the kinds of  things you were doing the kinds of  questions you were asking  that translates to much of what people  like myself and people in the fitness  space Tech space investor space  mindfulness space psychedelic space all  these different arenas  what they're doing now so um it's not  hyperbole to say that you are the ramoni  kahal of all those different spaces and  podcasting of course is one of those so  I owe you a great debt of gratitude and  many others do as well so my first  question for you is  what was your mindset around the time  that you wrote for our body  four hour work week but in particular  four hour body because the protocols in  that book are so very useful they were  at the time it was published they still  are now and so many of the things like  ice baths the discussion around Brown  fat thermogenesis  um resistance training in its uh you  know kind of basic form of just  providing enough Progressive overload to  get an adaptation not excessively long  workouts weight loss slow carb diet  um and on and on and on what were you  thinking at that time like if you can  think back to then like what were you  foraging for were you thinking about  when you woke up in the morning thinking  oh I'm gonna go find all this stuff that  at the time was really esoteric because  it is all played out very well  um what I'm basically saying is if you  want to know what's going to be  happening hot and useful in five years  ten years and onwards just look at what  Tim's doing at any moment so there it is  well thank you for the very generous  comparison and intro I'm thrilled to be  here so thanks for having me and  the for our body represented an  opportunity for me to do a few things  the first was to diversify my identity  from outside of the realm of the say  business category so it was a deliberate  move since the success of the first book  book The permission  to do something else that Publishers  would still want to gamble on  I wanted to see if I could maybe like  Michael Lewis take my audience with me  to other topics so that was a lateral  move that was very deliberate from a a  career optionality standpoint and then I  was doing I think what I've done for a  very long time and what I enjoy doing  which is looking at the most  prevalent beliefs and maybe dogmatic  assumptions in a given field  could be anything if anyone says always  never should I pay attention and take  note of that they may very well be right  but if anything is said in absolutes I  like to stress test and in the case of  say physical performance or physical  manipulation  tracking  2008 2009 was a very interesting time  because a number of different  Technologies were coming online meaning  being adopted by small groups he had the  very early stages of say accelerometers  as wearables you had a number of  different Innovations and means of  tracking that had never been available  before you had for instance  and this took a bit of ferreting on my  side it wasn't immediately on the  roadmap for our body but continuous  glucose monitors  at the time that was I want to say  exclusively limited to type 1 diabetics  or maybe type 2 diabetics but largely  type 1 diabetics and what captured my  interest and I can't recall how I came  across it but it was probably through  the very earliest iterations of what  later became the Quantified Self  movement  and I remember attending the very first  gathering at Kevin Kelly's house in  Pacifica California this is this was  around 2009  12 people 13 people to discuss  quantifying Health but  the the example of a professional race  car driver I can't remember the the form  factor whether it was F1 or Nascar or  other who was using this continual  glucose monitor for  paying attention to glucose levels while  driving  and I thought to myself  would that not be useful for healthy  normals would that not have other  applications if this if this is being  used by high performer in this type of  context might it have other types of  applications which then led me to use  the very early versions of Dexcom which  were really painful to implant no longer  the case of course that's changed a lot  and  I wanted to see how I might be able to  find a handful of different categories  of things there's the new like the  genuinely new like CGM at that point was  genuinely new the very old  that might have some room for scientific  investigation and I would say when I say  scientific I don't necessarily mean  randomized controlled trials at a  university I do think as an N of one  if you think about study design and you  can even blind you could even Placebo  control and I knew people in the small  subculture of Quantified Self who did  this you can I think approach things in  a methodical way where you can make a  lot of progress in trying to determine  causality or lack thereof looking at  very old things looking at orphaned  things so for instance  there are many examples in the world of  doping where you have say Balco back in  the day where famously Barry Bonds and  others purportedly use things like the  cream and the clear and these were based  on anabolics that were sourced from  Soviet literature or older literature  from the 50s and 60s that might not be  on the radar of say the anti-doping  groups that would administer the testing  so all of these different buckets were  of interest to me and I begin where I  usually do which is interviewing folks  so I would interview one or two people  in a given field and I might ask them  any number of questions so one is what  are the Nerds doing on the weekends or  at night this is also really good for  investing it's like all right what are  the really technical nerds doing  at night or on the weekends after  they've put in a really long work day or  work week let's take a really close look  at that another one is and I'll create a  flow for this but what are rich people  doing now  that everyone or  tens or hundreds of millions of people  might be doing  10 years from now  and an example of that would be let's  just say full-time assistant virtual  assistant AI  right so we've seen the needs and wants  being addressed by different technology  but it's an iteration of the same thing  on some level  in the case of say using chat GPT tied  into zapier for various functions  and then where are people cobbling  together awkward Solutions  so where are people piecing together  awkward Solutions  and is there room for some type of  innovation there these are a few of the  questions that I would not only ask  myself but ask experts in different  areas so if I end up spending time say  this was a few years prior to  writing the for our body I spent time at  NASA Ames and was interacting with a  number of scientists some people who  were working on all sorts of biological  tests and looking at genomics  and had a very Frank discussion about  where they thought if they had to push  right so I'll ask questions like  push a little bit into the realm of  Science Fiction and speculation because  I'm sure you can't support  any type of projection like that with  the literature with scientific  literature but what do you think some of  the risks are of say publishing your  genome because at the time a number of  high profile folks had just made their  full genomes available and they're like  well I think in the near future it'd be  possible to reconstruct someone's face  based on their genetic data  and they're like high degree of  confidence like zero to 100 how  confident yeah 80 90 I'm like okay I  should pay attention to that because if  you're making your data available let's  just say and it's anonymized per se you  still might be identifiable it's like  okay that raises some interesting  questions like okay well then how might  you get around that how might you put in  safeguards so that you are the one and  only keeper of your data so to speak  I brought up all sorts of targeted  Weaponry uh by sort of Bio weapons  possibilities that I was interested in  and then I would ask that person who's  clearly like willing to  step outside of the box of whatever he's  working on day to day  who are two of your close friends or two  thinkers you really pay a lot of  attention to are kind of at the bleeding  edge of something and unorthodox and  then I would just continue to have these  conversations over and over again and  the the the the these the stream of  development that I paid a lot of  attention to is something along the  lines of the following so the the  the very Beginnings are usually in some  type of extreme case and I think the  extremes  and this goes for product design as well  but the extremes inform the mean but not  vice versa so you can actually learn a  lot by studying the edge cases so  racehorses for instance uh you'll often  see things start with say raise horses  uh or people with wasting diseases for  instance or any type of chronic  or terminal illness who are willing to  try  some more experimental interventions  then let's just take one step further  bodybuilding see a lot of interesting  behavior in bodybuilding and high-level  athletes then billionaires then rich  people than the rest of us right so  my assumption is and was for the for our  body that  along the lines of William Gibson's  quote you know the future is already  here it's just not evenly distributed so  I'm never predicting the future I'm just  finding the seeds that are germinating  that I think are going to bloom and end  up spreading really really widely so  that's that's that's generally where I  start and I assume the practitioners are  going to be ahead of the papers  so studying say the coaches  whose jobs are on the line who are  getting paid based on Athlete  Performance  and assuming that a lot of that will  eventually  if it holds up make its way into say the  peer-reviewed exercise science papers  but it's going to have a lag time of  three to five years at least at least at  least takes a long time yeah science is  often very slow to catch up  um  you mentioned many things that have  questions about  um you mentioned paying attention to the  new the very old or the orphaned  um  so interesting and I just thought I'd  tell you that when you sit down with a  graduate student or a postdoc and  they're trying to come up with a project  rarely do you say you know like what do  you want to work on and they fire back  like a really interesting  question sometimes they do but that's  the rare person more often than not  you'll send them to the literature and  they'll come back with like okay there's  this new technique that we can use to  answer a set of questions better than  ever before where there's a very old  Theory I want to revisit or there's this  theory that no one pays attention to in  fact we had one guest on here Odette  rashavi who is studying it essentially  inheritance of traits transgenerational  inheritance of traits that's a little  bit although different from lamarkian uh  Evolution but it's a lot like that  um in some ways and you know these  orphan theories that everyone assumed  were wrong and that there is a basis for  them so I think there's Real Genius in  that analysis  um it also struck me as you were listing  off some of your process Circa the the  writing of the four-hour body that  I and many other people are probably  curious about what the operations around  all that looked like so are you or were  you at the time like waking up in the  morning going okay I'm gonna take a walk  and think about the new the old and the  orphaned or  um  well I'm gonna take a walk or sit in and  share anything about like what are the  Nerds doing right now what are rich  people doing right now and cobbling  together awkward Solutions was was that  exploration a structured practice for  you or is this just something that  um was the consequence of being Tim  Ferriss waking up in the morning and  just like leaning into that because I've  experienced both right you know but I  think a lot of us are uh Curious I mean  that there's a lot of Mystique around  you  um whether you like us to dispel it  whether whether you like it or not  um it it it's there and um and we're not  trying to to pry but pry away is the is  the establishment of structure for you  something that's the consequence of  structure in the first place it's like  okay now it's time to think or do you  just allow things to geyser up to the  surface  I do both and I would say that in the  case of the four-hour body it's it's a  bit of an anomaly  compared to my later books because I had  recorded effectively every work ad I'd  done since age 16 as a competitive  athlete I just I had a lot of records  and I kept copious notes on supplement  use and everything imaginable so I have  what you might call hypergraphia I just  capture it  almost everything in writing and that  was very useful because at various  points in time let's just say I looked  at a photograph of myself from making  this up but  2004 and I think I would like to look  and feel like that again okay let me  revisit my workout logs let me just  replicate the proceeding three to six  months of workouts and look at my intake  and my diet at the time and lo and  behold more or less I could replicate  the same type of look and feel and  performance so I had a lot already  logged that I thought was worth  examining and putting under scrutiny  trying to replicate with other people I  do think replication is really important  and then when it came time to commit to  writing the book I thought about what  types of  many books would be of great interest to  me personally and that book like many of  my other books was written in such a  fashion that it could be a Choose Your  Own Adventure book did not need to be  read in fact in many ways it shouldn't  be read linearly from page one to the  end you get to pick and choose which  chapters are of Interest based on breath  hold vertical jump endurance hypertrophy  cold exposure for fat loss whatever it  might be  and then I began talking to people and  at the at the very outer bounds of  self-experimentation at least in the Bay  Area it's a pretty small community so  you're one or two lily pads from just  about everyone and it's not accidental  that I put myself in that environment in  San Francisco specifically  and more generally in the Bay Area  Silicon Valley because there's just a  high surface area for luck to stick to  because you have so many serendipitous  encounters you have so many people  focusing on different disciplines that I  think was the  fertilizer  and the fertile ground for everything  else was actually the choosing the wear  of writing physically being located in  San Francisco and then when I'm  structuring things  maybe I'll get into some of the  nitty-gritty but I was using at the time  and I still like to use a program called  scrivener which is actually designed  predominantly for screenwriting it's  used for many things now novels and so  on it's expanded it's reached quite a  bit but it allows you to gather research  and all of your documents and drafts so  that you can move them around in very  novel ways so you can view say a split  pane of your research and what you're  working on simultaneously without having  to toggle between a lot of different  windows and I was very promiscuous in my  gathering of data so I would gather from  say the web using a Web Clipper from  Evernote which I was involved with as a  company and  basically without bias capture as much  as possible put three asterisks next to  anything that I thought I really might  want to revisit after I had read  something a second time which I would  always do then I could control F to find  just three asterisks because they don't  occur much in normal writing just like  people authors writers will you use TK  meaning find such and such a date data  needs to be inserted later but I don't  interrupt the flow of writing let me  putting TK because it doesn't really  appear in natural English much uh in  terms of structured thinking the way I  approached it was  during that period of time in my life it  was interviews tracking people down  conversations emails reading so  ingestion let's just say for the workday  then a break for training and and  actually using myself as the human  guinea pig for various things that had  surfaced that might be on the docket  where were you training at that time San  Francisco is not famous for amazing gyms  it's not famous for amazing gems at the  time I was training mostly at a Climbing  Gym called Mission Cliffs they didn't  have much but they had barbells and they  had and they had kettlebells yep I also  had in the in the walkway leading from  the front door of the apartment I was  renting is more of a house the front  door all the way to the first set of  stairs there were 30 kettlebells of  various types and I was training for  certification because I wanted to put  myself on some type of deadline with  accountability for that type of training  to get a better understanding of it so  train for a few hours I also had  developed a friendship with Kelly  Starrett so San Francisco CrossFit who I  have tremendous amount of respect for  likewise on multiple levels terrific and  his new book  yeah not to move this great book he's so  good yeah he he really not only talks  the talk but walks the walk and  exemplifies many of the capabilities  that he teaches which I take seriously I  like practitioners not just the people  with pretty theories although the  theories are important I prefer to see  someone who can actually put them into  practice so Kelly served that function  uh certainly and we're still very close  friends  and then  after that all right shake off the  cobwebs get the body moving get the  brain moving also eat and then I would  actually focus on synthesis so I would  write generally from let's call it  9 00 PM or 10 p.m through to 4 or 5 a.m  and I would ride the wave if I happen to  be in the zone if I weren't in the zone  I wouldn't force it and I would try to  get more sleep but I have always  performed best with my writing in those  witching hours of let's call it 10 P.M  to 4 AM and my experience is that  The Writer's I've interviewed the writer  friends I've become close with  if you look at when they made themselves  not necessarily what they do now right  but what they did that eventually got  them to escape velocity  they're almost always doing most of  their writing very late at night or very  early in the morning when the rest of  the world or their social group is  inactive wow yeah and I say wow because  of course all of this was prior to the  publication of Matt Walker's seminal  book right why we sleep which I really  see is the book that shifted  a lot of people fortunately from the  I'll sleep when I'm dead mindset uh too  I'll you know to really paying attention  to it and um you know I don't think Matt  gets enough credit I mean there there's  been a revision of a few points within  that book but the majority of it is just  spot on and Hyper legitimate so good and  um and yet what you're describing is a  schedule that you know starting to write  at 9 00 pm and finishing up around 4am  but you talked about research earlier  that day and training and eating so were  there naps in there I would sleep  from say four to maybe 11 or 12. so I  would be getting up later and I've had  conversations with Matt about this and  there are  night owls and morning Larks and there  are certainly differences in the code  meaning the genetics but that worked  very very well for me for a very long  time it is however a very  challenging social schedule so once you  have a significant other and every  girlfriend I've ever had is a morning  person if you want to spend time  together that schedule just does not  work so I made compromises later for the  social side of things but if if you put  a gun to my head and said you need to  write the best book humanly possible  that is your only priority outside of  some exercise and fuel I would follow  the same schedule I know several very  successful podcasters Lex Friedman in  particular who I think he's trying to  follow a more normal schedule now but  he's pseudo nocturnal at least by my ex  my read and there are a couple other  online content creators Derek from more  plates more dates who's hyper productive  in his domain and is mostly nocturnal  and then as you're describing your  writing routine and your overall routine  I was thinking that you know the the  great skateboarder everyone knows Tony  Hawk who is obviously a great  skateboarder no doubt about that but  Rodney Mullen who invented the ollie on  Street the kickflip the only like Rodney  is basically nocturnal and has been for  a long time and would you know  skateboard up and down the boardwalk in  Santa Monica in the middle of the night  because lack of distraction yes it  really was and he's been doing that  since his teens I don't know what he's  doing these days but I think a lot of  creators just need space and and I  always wonder if that's because when  they at least the ones that are not uh  socially dysfunctional like yourself who  when they are around people there's just  almost hopefully a desire to interact so  you almost have to remove the stimulus  completely yeah it it it removes the  plausible deniability which might not be  the perfect use of that phrase but in  the sense that you it's harder to fool  yourself into thinking you're doing  something important when you're checking  your messages or social media at two in  the morning who are we kidding folks you  should be writing in this case right and  writers will do anything to avoid  writing I remember iron and wrote a book  about writing which is actually  fantastic I can't remember the exact  title it might just be on non-fiction  writing something like that and she  talked about polishing the sneakers or  the shoes before writing like I really  just need to do this one thing which is  to just clean up that shoe because  somebody should really clean it up and  at some point I should clean it up and  therefore why don't I just do there's no  time like the president I'll just do  that and it's all to avoid writing which  is the harder thing and in my  conversations with Matt also I should  say that  as someone who has self-described as a  person who struggles with onset insomnia  Matt made the point and sometimes we  need to relearn things  maybe you should just go to bed later  sure and that might address some of this  onset insomnia and I don't know the  causes for that but I do get a second  win very late could be related to some  cortisol release abnormality or just  different scripting in my system who  knows I'd like to take a quick break and  acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic  greens athletic greens now called ag-1  is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink  that covers all of your foundational  nutritional needs I've been taking  athletic green since 2012 so I'm  delighted that they're sponsoring the  podcast the reason I started taking  athletic greens and the reason I still  take athletic greens once are usually  twice a day is that it gets to be in the  probiotics that I need for gut health  our gut is very important it's populated  by gut microbiota that communicate with  the brain the immune system and  basically all the biological systems of  our body to strongly impact our  immediate and long-term health and those  probiotics and athletic greens are  optimal and vital for microbiotic health  in addition athletic greens contains a  number of adaptogens vitamins and  minerals that make sure that all of my  foundational nutritional needs are met  and it tastes great if you'd like to try  athletic greens you can go to  athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll  give you five free travel packs that  make it really easy to mix up athletic  greens while you're on the road in the  car on the plane Etc and they'll give  you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2  again that's athleticgreens.com huberman  to get the five free travel packs and  the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 I'll  mention one other  one other maybe sheuristic that I use  for trying to peek around corners which  is  if I find an example of an outlier  trying to find two or three right  because one is an exception two is  interesting three is worth investigating  that's sort of how I think about it and  I recognize the plural of anecdote does  not equal data however a lot of  interesting discoveries begin as case  studies or case histories and so there  are some things we could talk about that  that I've paid attention to over the  last few years that are not in the for  our body that I think are  quite interesting and raise very very  exciting questions but I'd love to hear  about those yeah and along the lines of  what I call anec data I mean most of  what we know about human memory stems  from one patient hm who had his  hippocampi removed for epilepsy and of  course I've been on Millions probably  close to millions of studies in animals  and humans focusing on the hippocampi  but most of what we know about human  memory is from one guy yeah yeah exactly  so there's  there's there's a lot to be examined not  all of it will get funding for rcts  let's be realistic this is especially  true if you're hoping for any type of  directive data notice I'm not saying  conclusive but if you are a human who's  going to be making decisions about diet  Health exercise if you want any  consensus you're doomed you'll be you're  not going to get any answers before you  die can you say that twice so that the  internet can hear it extra loud and  clear for those of you that are arguing  about nutrition on Twitter like it it  might actually be life wasted yeah I  mean I'm not being judgmental I mean I  think that there's validity in lots of  those Pockets there's stuff that's wrong  in lots of those Pockets yeah  um they're diets that work extremely  well like you know four hour diet it's a  slow carb I always called the four hour  diet but the Slow Carb Diet yeah it  works extremely well anytime I've  followed it I get much leaner and  stronger and all that stuff  that it's purported to do it it works  um but yeah maybe you could just uh  explain what you mean by that because I  think there are some argument slash  friction spaces that are truly an energy  sink yeah I would just say focus on what  works for you and your family or your  team and  if you're arguing on the internet  recognize that you're just doing it  because you like arguing on the internet  you're not going to convince anyone of  anything  and uh  you're just gonna make yourself uh more  frustrated if you plan on changing any  opinions so for me it's Live and Let  Live and  uh the more people who engage in that  type of behavior the more competitive  Advantage do you have if you don't so  for me I'm like okay if you want to  spend this vital  non-renewable resource of yours called  time on that  if I ever compete against you I'm going  to win so great I'll just uh I'll also  not even try to convince you to stop  doing that unless you see the logic in  it which I have which is why I also  don't have at least for two years have  mostly had no social apps installed on  my phone uh and we could talk about that  because I think recognizing that these  things have been engineered to overcome  any type of self-discipline with  billions of dollars  at stake uh should lead you to believe  that you're bringing a knife to a  gunfight so I just don't have the apps  on my phone to begin with  and I find it much more gratifying to  see  disproportionate change  from small inputs so that's what I'm  looking for and I'm also looking for  changes that are easy to make  that can have high adherence that have  very limited downside which is very  different from proving something  for instance in the for our body took a  look at the potential effect of cell  phones or the proximity of cell phones  to say gonadal function and reproductive  health  and the literature that was available at  the time was very limited had some  animal studies mice rats Etc I recognize  humans are not just large mice so they  don't always translate but I looked at I  said okay  looking at this simplistically is a  plausible that there could be similar  effects on humans seems to be the case  also based on conversations with people  who are Specialists but would never go  on record therefore  if your phone is in your pocket just  have it on airplane mode I mean it does  not have a high cost  and and then  pending any revision we can see but  while the jury is still out I'm going to  risk mitigate by taking this step well  and I just want to say uh thank you  there too I read that recommendation I  followed the recommendation of not  keeping the phone on in my front pocket  or back pocket  um again that's anecdata  um  my sperm analysis isn't relevant to this  conversation but worked out but you know  you could say well that's not  necessarily because you had the phone  off but um I did a very long detailed  episode on male and female fertility  there is now a what I view as a really  quality meta-analysis and it's pretty  clear that there are effects of the  smartphone on proximity of the  smartphone when it's turned on uh that  are not good for sperm isn't necessarily  going to render somebody sterile but on  sperm that can be separated out from the  heat effects and so essentially this is  another instance in which you're you're  right and I think more data will come  out and Mia EMF conspiracy theorists uh  no  um do I wear tin foil underwear no  but uh I think it's interesting I think  it's important and thanks to you  um it cued my attention to it in fact I  teach about that in a course on on  neural circuits and biology and health  and disease amazing and I don't expect  to get everything right at all yeah that  would be crazy I'd like to think I'm not  totally crazy and it's very important if  you are going to do self-experimentation  or experimentation in small groups which  the Quantified Self  community did quite well and I think  still does quite well  you should really make every effort to  not fool yourself which is hard it's  it's challenging at times but read books  like bad science  read books like How to lie with  Statistics ensure that you are able to  read studies well you don't have to be  the best in the world but that you can  on some level identify the strengths and  weaknesses of studies this doesn't take  a long time certainly our friend Peter  Tia Dr Peter ortia has studying the  studies which is a multiple part blog  series dedicated to this there are other  ways to approach it I took one of his  podcasts republished it on the Tim  Ferriss show because it talked about how  to examine studies what powering refers  to things like this in the span of one  or two weeks you could really become  literate with the building blocks of  scientific literacy with respect to  reading studies and that gives you such  an enormous life Advantage it's hard to  overstate yeah I agree and I also think  that there are a lot of things that just  simply will not ever be explored in a  randomized control trial  um one of the things that Peter and I  have talked about before is he texts me  know what are your thoughts on bpc157  this is a gastric peptide that's now  been synthesized so people will inject  it into a tissue that they're trying to  heal or improve lots and lots of  anecdata on bpc157  making injuries heal faster Etc again  anecdata I've used it I took an  injection of it yesterday in fact  um  Peter basically is not a Believer  because there is a lack of published  data on this which is perfectly fine or  I should say he's um skeptical and so  there's always that possibility of a  placebo effect but I don't think there  will ever be a really nice controlled  trial on bpc157 because the financial  incentives aren't there and no smart  graduate student is going to go do a  thesis on this that so that's the  reality I mean maybe one will do it now  that we're having this conversation but  it just doesn't that the payout isn't  there yeah and that last one you  mentioned is one that people miss a lot  people doing these studies are people  with careers who are planning their  careers and so they choose what they're  going to invest time in very carefully  so that's another limiter on what we'll  end up in an RCT or not right so uh I  think that's good for people to hear  and as you get more involved with  science and in my case through a  foundation you know scissor Foundation  funding a lot of early stage science you  realize how expensive it is and how long  it takes it is a long-term investment  and if you are looking to make  behavioral changes or modify  aspects of yourself cognitive physical  psycho emotional or otherwise  identifying  interventions right options that seem to  have some plausible upside like there is  a a mechanism that might make sense in  humans  if you feel fairly certain there's very  limited downside which should include  talking to people who are presenting  their results as anecdata  then maybe  you consider using X if you can cap your  downside and I recall for instance  looking at trans Resveratrol  specifically not for longevity but in  potentially increasing endurance for for  our body  and I ended up  testing it and there's a funny story  associated with that didn't quite work  out as planned and I don't use it any  longer but what I experienced prior to  actually finding this on forums was  joint pain elbow pain the one most  consistent side effect was what felt  like tendinosis in the elbows and then I  went online  and I'd already done this but I hadn't  come across I think it was the 500  groups people have been using 500  milligrams of transverse Resveratrol  daily for long periods of time  and one of the most common reported side  effects is joint pain and I was like  okay I'm not willing to make that  trade-off yeah and that makes sense to  me yeah  I think um  it would be fun if ever you were willing  that we could do a hybrid podcast on  supplement fails I have some spectacular  failures as do I and I'm thinking I'm  thinking about a few of them I mean some  that were really  um like took me off course like there's  one supplement uh called bulbine  natalensis this is another another one  of these shrubs it sounds like an  infection I mean this thing will really  spike your testosterone and free  testosterone I'm talking back acne like  huge strange gains aggression it's  really wild and then after about seven  to ten days  it all crashes and you go below Baseline  yeah even testicular pain so it was  unclear so you if you're a smart person  you halt use right so I can understand  why people are skeptical of certain  things and then of course there are  supplements that I'm a big fan of and  that you're a big fan of we talked about  those things elsewhere but  um it might be fun to do supplement  fails podcast if ever you're willing  though I could do and just experimental  fails oh yeah yeah end of one  experimental fails which includes things  that people might not think about for  instance for our body had quite a bit  of real estate dedicated to looking at  things like PRP so completely rich  plasma I think there's a role for it  it's not useful for everything but for  certain types of engineer repair  I think it's very interesting uh but  uh every time you get injected this is  where you have to be careful because  there are very few  free lunches out there there's there's  usually some type of feedback loop your  system is very smart at Auto regulating  things this is this is outside of that a  consideration that I hadn't made which  is every time you have an injection  there's a chance of an infection  particularly if the site in my case was  the elbow and the injection was made for  the PRP  not quite where it should have been  slightly to the rear of the elbow where  this the skin is very thick and so it  pushed  staph bacteria from a mid layer of the  skin into the joint capsule not good and  that really could have ended very poorly  I ended up having to go to the ER and  get it get it all removed and so on but  that could have ended up in a in a much  much more severe  situation so you do have to be careful  with this stuff I've become a little  more conservative with someone I do  including injections I'm like all right  like let me think  twice about the injections if I'm going  to swallow something let me make sure  I'm really looking at the implications  for the liver  yeah smart very smart I'm curious about  some of the things that you talked about  in the for our body and that you've  mentioned today things like  accelerometers  continuous glucose monitors deliberate  cold exposure  how many of those things are you still  doing on a regular basis and how many do  you  um you know use a couple times a week or  a couple times a month or go through  phases of using and not using  cold exposure I use as consistently as  is practical so if I'm traveling it's a  little harder but we're in LA right now  one of the first things I did was find a  few options for contrast therapy one of  the first things I did  and by contrast I do not mean  infrared sauna and cold plunge I'd much  rather have hot and cold water just in  terms of sort of speed of heating the  Japanese approach right for just speed  of vasodilation particularly for injury  recovery  I think it's incredibly helpful for mood  regulations certainly in this case and  cold water for mood regulation or the  treatment of say depression or as a  preemptive intervention to avoid or  mitigate depression is old  used to be prescribed for melancholy and  people like the van goghs of the world  would be prescribed cold baths so that  was something I was like well  let's take a look at some of the old  history read about that and then look  into PubMed and so on to see what might  be supported so the cold I'm still using  I become increasingly interested this  was not in the four-hour body but whole  body hyperthermia often excluding the  head for  depression which I know there's some  some research yeah out of UCSF yeah  right now yeah really interesting  studies too early to report I'm not  involved in these but I think these are  really important studies because for all  the people saying oh well you know it's  ice bath stuff you know metabolism this  metabolism that but one thing that's  very clear is long-lasting very  significant increase in the  catecholamines dopamine epinephrine  norepinephrine not a replacement perhaps  for antidepressant medication but as you  said to move the needle toward  antidepressant States that's the  cocktail and  um heat as well yeah yeah and the  hyperthermia especially the way it is  formatted right now with some of the  research is is very early stages there's  going to be less adherence it's not as  readily available it's a cold shower  cold bath so I do think about the  Practical implications that but right  now it's very interesting slow carb diet  still use it all the time it is not my  default 24 7 as it used to be so maybe  I'm just getting older and more  self-indulgent but if I find myself  going off the rails a bit and I'm like  okay I'm getting closer to Muffin Top  here let's stage an intervention then I  will go immediately back to slow carb  diet and within within a matter of weeks  I it's it's pretty easily corrected and  it's just a cue for people I know it's  um you know it's slow carb diet achieved  great dominance in fact it wasn't it  featured on or mentioned in an episode  of Orange Is the New Black I think it  might have been it's made it's made  appearances on a handful of shows great  I realized that I've been referring to  the Slow Carb Diet several times  throughout this discussion so for those  that aren't familiar with the Slow Carb  Diet I know they can go look up what  that is but so that we can keep them  here sure for the rest of this  discussion and not have to send them out  and back uh just yet  um could you give us just a brief top  Contour of what the slow carb diet is  sure this is a slow carb diet is  intended to be a simple easy to adhere  to diet for people who have perhaps  failed other diets that allows you to  recompose your body so improve muscle  mass decrease  body fat percentage and the rules are  really simple and that's part of what  makes it work  it's not ideal for every sport in every  circumstance but broadly speaking it  works for a lot of people who've had  trouble with dieting in the past  so rule number one  don't drink calories  that's it very simple so black coffee  unsweetened tea great juice out anything  with calories out  you could add a little bit of heavy  cream to your coffee let's say but  that's that's also bending the rules in  a way that I don't like so in the  beginning it's like follow the rules so  you can break them later so in the  beginning let's just say you can't drink  calories number two don't eat anything  White  sounds pretty basic right just don't  need anything that is the color of white  or that could be white basically that  means you're going to be avoiding  starches and uh things that are are  similar to starches that includes things  like oatmeal that includes things like  oatmeal so roughly speaking just  avoiding things that are white or that  could be white will get you pretty far  and yes there are exceptions like  cauliflower fine you can have  cauliflower but again don't get fancy  right it's very easy to outsmart  yourself when it comes to behavioral  change keep it simple so for at least  two weeks forget about the exceptions  right  don't drink calories  don't eat anything White  and then  eat 30 grams of protein within 30  minutes of waking up okay we got that  and then there are a few buckets you can  choose from Ryan so you have vegetables  beans and lentils  uh and then some type of protein so  you're going to come up with meals that  you can follow  without deviating for a period of one or  two weeks just come up with the same  meals  and that's going to sound boring yes but  guess what you do it already you just  might not realize it  and the the lentils and the beans  specifically as a prereq  we can get into some of the reasons but  add a lot of fiber and also inhibit  appetite right so that's actually a very  important component of these meals  and there may be a handful of other  rules but those are the basics and then  the Redemption is take one day off per  week and just go [ __ ] crazy that's  cheat day there are some epic cheat days  out there some I've captured for myself  and anything goes when I say anything I  do mean anything so if you want to  consume multiple pizzas pints of ice  cream whatever indulge I left one out  no fruit during the week so avoid fruit  avoid fructose so  agave nectar anything that is sort of  hidden sugar avoid all that uh so no  added sweeteners obviously but avoid  avoid fruit and fructose and again it's  not going to kill you guess what if  you're from European ancestry  your ancestors did not have like  blueberries in the middle of winter  generally speaking right so you'll  you'll be fine for a few weeks and then  there's that cheat day and cheat day  anything goes the amount of damage you  can do on cheat day is pretty limited  and there are ways you can mitigate that  there's a whole chapter called damage  control in the four-hour body but  focusing just on that diet and having  one day off where you know you can do  anything means when you are controlling  yourself for those six days of the week  you're not giving up your favorite foods  forever you can even keep a list of all  things you want to eat on cheat day and  then you have free license to eat on  cheat day and that provides you with a  release valve so that you can build in  the cheating as opposed to having it  occur as a failure point  and there are a handful of other things  there if you have Domino Foods in the  house for instance if you eat a lot of  almonds or mixed nuts and you're just  going to sit there compulsively eating  them while you're sitting at your laptop  don't have what I call Domino Foods in  the house which you're going to really  create some portion control issues but  broadly speaking don't drink calories  donate things that are white  take from three categories and build  your meals out and those are the meals  that you follow do not eat fruit  or fructose and then cheat one day a  week and Saturday is a nice day for  cheat day for most folks and just to  answer some questions people are going  to have no that doesn't mean 24 hours  that you can spread out over two days  that will actually set you back but the  amount of fat that you can store in a  handful of sittings over 24 hours which  legitimately is more like 12 to 18 hours  pretty Limited  um so that's a slow grab diet  great thank you for that I also want to  ask  is it okay to take the day after cheat  day and fast or do one meal that day  when I followed the Slow Carb Diet I  benefited from it tremendously lost fat  gained muscle tons of energy sleeping  great required less caffeine all sorts  of wonderful things stable blood sugar I  felt so so good  um really enjoyed the cheat days I  really really enjoyed the GPS so much  fun um at some point there's some  gastric distress that comes from you  know not regulating intake which led me  to not want to eat the next day so I  tended to do the cheat days on Sunday in  my case and then I would fast most of  Monday just water black coffee tea and  then I might have a small meal in the  evening and then by Tuesday I was back  on the Slow Carb Diet does that seem  like a um an uh sort of a detrimental  deviation from the from the plan  I think that if that is what works for  you then that is what works for you so  this is this this low carb diet template  for me is a starting point  and generally I'll say  I think this is from Picasso right it's  like learn the rules as an amateur so  you can break them as a professional but  it's like I recommend most people kind  of stick with the format  for  a handful of weeks  and measure the results right there so  there are guidelines for how to measure  the the scale is a bit of a blunt  instrument so there are other ways but  if you're extremely overweight you can  just use the scale  and fasting I think is fine or just  ratcheting back your caloric consumption  significantly and what happens over time  for most people also is for the first  say four weeks on cheat day you're gonna  go completely insane and I remember I  was doing something much stricter called  the cyclical ketogenic diet which is a  whole separate  thing it's much more  limiting in terms of what you can eat  but I was training for ultimately the  Nationals in Chinese kickboxing this was  happening in 99  so it's training super hard I was  following a cyclical ketogenic diet  which meant I could eat very few things  but I did have this one cheat day and I  would do a glycogen depletion workout  beforehand which is one of the things  you can do to limit the damage on cheat  day do a glycogen depletion workout  beforehand and then I would just go  crazy I mean I would drive to like  Krispy Kreme by 12 donuts and they would  be gone by the time I got home and it  wasn't an hour away it was like a 10  minute drive  Donuts be gone right I would go to  Safeway and I would buy a bag of those  Fun Size Snickers and that would be just  a tiny portion of my calories stuff for  you it a lot of sweet stuff I also did  the Savory stuff I mean I had my  favorites nothing was pizza nothing was  safe nothing was safe my my Paws got  into everything  and then over time because the next day  you're gonna feel like you got hit by a  diabetic dump truck  you start ratcheting back and you're  like okay maybe I don't need to do that  maybe cheat day will just be two meals  or maybe cheat day will just be like the  pastries in the morning with the coffee  and you start to regulate a bit  generally you don't have to but over  time you generally will  and I think after you've followed it to  the T just follow the Commandments for  say four to eight weeks then you can  certainly deviate and I'm not saying if  you're not hungry don't eat however in  many cases people have  they have acclimated to not eating in  the morning  and then they end up overeating later in  the day if you have that habit right if  you're consuming 50 of your calories or  more at dinner  and you want to lose body fat I would  say  get some cottage cheese or something  that will give you 30 grams easily in  the morning worst case scenario use a  protein of some type just don't make it  hyperchloric I mean powdered protein  like could be powdered powdered whey  protein whole food is going to do a lot  more  and no calorie counting correct no  calorie count  it tends to be self-limiting when you're  eating this much fiber and this much  protein  it tends to be very self-limiting what  you'll want to consume and what you can  consume  once again I had great experiences with  slow carb diet and I'm going to go back  on yeah nobody and nobody needs to buy  anything to figure it out if you just  search on tim.blog slow carb diet there  you'll get everything that you need  to get started no purchase necessary  well it works very very well I'll say  that and it's very straightforward to  follow and it does include the the  notorious uh cheat day uh Infamous cheat  day  um uh and it can be done  um on a on a very reasonable budget and  so if people want to learn more about  that they should go to Tim's blog on  four hour uh um for our body and slow  carb diet we'll provide a link yeah but  it's you know I think it's worth  highlighting again just how effective  that is you know as you pointed out  thousands and thousands of people  um using it to great success some of  whom were um quite obese and um yeah any  updates on those folks are they still  keeping the weight off I would like to  do a follow-up uh it's I think with  diets in general  there's a lot of reversion to the mean  you know regression to the means so I  would expect that that some have kept it  off and some have not that would be true  of I think every possible diet  especially for people who are overcoming  behavioral inertia of having gained  hundreds of pounds but I'd like to do  some follow-up what was fun about the  post I put together called how to lose  100 pounds on the Slow Carb Diet we had  we profiled say four or five people but  there were dozens and dozens and dozens  and dozens and this was a very long time  ago so  I would say that  a long-term follow-up would be super  interesting and that we did at one point  track several thousand people through a  platform at the time I think it was  coach.me  as they followed the soda curb diet for  the first sort of four to 12 weeks and  that was fascinating because I want the  data and I'm happy to be proven  incorrect with any of my assumptions I  mean I I don't view that as a failure I  mean I view that as a huge net gain and  uh it has a very high adherence rate so  I I pay attention to not just is  something effective does it get you the  outcome you want not only is it  efficient from a time and resource  perspective but how high is the  adherence rate right so if you take a  random sampling of a thousand people  from the US across the social economic  classes Etc how many people  practically speaking will be able to are  willing to follow this for say an  eight-week period of time or four week  period of time and I try to optimize for  the widest adherence because I know the  Slow Carb Diet people come on they're  like but what about intermittent fasting  what about this and what about endurance  athletes I'm like this is not for  everybody in all cases it just happens  to be a good default diet with a high  adherence rate and like you said it's  very inexpensive it can be followed very  very inexpensively I just sorry to  interrupt you one thing that I really  like about it is that many variants on  caloric restriction which is because  laws of thermodynamics definitely apply  yes we're not we're not trying to say  they don't  um but one of the issues with a lot of  things including intermittent fasting  which I sort of do some very end of  because I'm not really hungry to eat  until about 11 I like to train in the  morning if I can Etc  is that they can sometimes prevent best  performance in terms of especially  resistance training high intensity  resistance training so very low carb  diets I've tried them even if you're  paying attention to you know other ways  to restock glycogen performance drops  off whereas a slow carb diet I feel like  I can think  I can work I can exercise I can sleep  like everything just works well but  there's one thing in it that I want to  raise it when I heard this I thought  there's no way this is true which was uh  making sure that you get 30 or so grams  of protein within 30 minutes of waking  yeah and I thought how can that be like  how can adding protein early in the day  actually make a difference and it really  did work I was I still track my numbers  so in terms of dropping body fat  percentage increasing muscle it really  does work now whether or not that's  simply because it's offsetting food  intake that I would have  um food that I would have taken in later  in the day I don't know and I don't I'm  not going to make myself my own control  experiment to the point that I drive  myself crazy but it really does work  quite well  um to get past sticking points you just  get that 30 grams of protein early so  sort of violate the the time restricted  feeding component deliberately with some  protein in the morning then still train  and do all the other things and you know  carry on as usual and it's just so it  seems so peculiar like eating more and  and losing body fat but it works yeah  it's counterintuitive and a lot of  approaches can work for a lot of  different people right to State the  obvious but this particular aspect of  this low carb diet  is helpful for let's just say the  majority of the people in that thousand  person sample I was talking about the  hypothetical pull from different parts  of say the us or anywhere  because it it it seems to help with a  few things first there's just the  thermic effect of food and for protein  there's a greater thermic effect you  also have and I think there's there's  decent at the time there was decent  literature to support this so I don't  know if it's changed that the protein  intake  along those lines has an appetite  suppressing effect so the The Net Daily  calories consumed tends to be less when  someone has a higher protein meal  earlier in the day and last but not  least I will say one of the risks and  there are many people who execute well  on this but you have to be very  meticulous which is true of the  ketogenic diet as well you can get  yourself into a lot of trouble if you do  it 60 right or 70 right you're really in  there you can get yourself in their  massive psoriasis I mean my scalp you  know sloughing off like when I'm in  ketosis like I'm like what the hell is  going on here going back on some complex  carbohydrates and going away yeah  exactly yeah I don't need I don't need a  randomized control trial no I simply  don't want to run that experiment  against your scalp you know so in the  case of say time restricted feeding  some people who do intermittent fasting  lose a lot of muscle mass and there are  multiple reasons for this I think people  should make use of relatively widely  available tools like dexa and so on to  ensure that your composition is actually  moving the way you think it's moving  make sure you standardize your hydration  for that as well as time of day just Pro  tip that's true for blood tests as well  but  it seems to get net net better effects  than trying to teach people how to fast  effectively which you can do and we can  talk about fasting that's something that  was not included in the four-hour body  that were I to rewrite it today I would  include a section and there was a bit in  tools of Titans to address that on more  extended fasts let's just call it three  to seven day fasts uh so that's an area  that's of of great interest to me as is  ketosis and metabolic Psychiatry I'll uh  Chris Palmer who we both know incredible  I mean what he's what the Awakening that  he's created through his book and going  on your podcast my podcast and others  and and you know  letting people be aware that changes in  diet can impact mental health so I think  in two three years it's going to be a  duh and we're not just talking about the  difference between you know um slamming  back horrible Foods horrible Forest  Foods versus eating really clean I mean  really specific diet protocols to treat  mental health yeah incredible yeah super  excited so that's that's one of the  things that I'm paying a lot of  attention to right now they're a handful  in that realm within the just say the  the interplay of Mind and Body since the  Cartesian Duality and separation of this  too makes no sense from a biological  standpoint so that's that's something  that certainly captured my attention and  I paid a lot of attention to even as far  back as early 2000s for mental health  and just cognitive performance I'd like  to take a quick break and thank our  sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is  a personalized nutrition platform that  analyzes data from your blood and DNA to  help you better understand your body and  help you reach your health goals I've  long been a believer in getting regular  blood work done for the simple reason  that many of the factors that impact  your immediate and long-term Health can  only be assessed with a quality blood  test the problem with a lot of blood and  DNA tests out there however is that  they'll give you information about  certain lipid markers or hormone markers  but no information about what to do with  all of that data inside tracker makes it  very easy to look at your levels of  hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc  and then to assess what sorts of  Behavioral nutritional supplementation  or perhaps other interventions you might  want to use in order to bring those  numbers into the ranges that are optimal  for your health for this week only the  week of June 19 2023 inside tracker is  offering a buy one get one free on their  ultimate plan this is their best  discount of the year you can get this  offer by going to insidetracker.com  huberman again that's inside tracker.com  huberman  thanks for revisiting some of the four  hour body and slow carb diet and  elaborating on some of the process that  went into that and I think creators of  all kinds thinkers of all kinds and  people who are interested in the  contents of the four hour body are going  to be very grateful for that information  I certainly am fascinated by your  process one of the things that you  mentioned along the lines of process was  you know  the power of places and where one  happens to live I think there's a essay  by Paul Graham that talks about this  it's a little outdated  um you know and it talks about the  messages that you  um the tacit messages of being in  certain cities I think it was you know  like Boston you're not smart enough  um uh what was it was New York uh you're  not powerful enough uh and not you  obviously I just thinking and um or you  should be more powerful is the message  like the tacit message um Los Angeles  um what you're what you're doing people  aren't paying attention paying enough  attention to it something like that like  don't asset messages these are  stereotypes about cities certainly  cities change  um the role of places is an interesting  one like you know you mentioned you know  small gathering Kevin Kelly's house  Quantified Self and I think for people  who don't know people like that right  um maybe we could  get your thoughts on you how would one  think about where to live and and maybe  even curating their own Gatherings  useful Gatherings because it's not that  uh I have to imagine it's not that you  guys sat back and you're like I'm Tim  Ferriss and he's like I'm Kevin Kelly  let's have a gathering so we can talk  about it in a few years on a podcast  this stuff happens  um that word you know it's dangerous  word organically  um  when people who have common interests  decide to get together and talk and  listen and brainstorm and I'm yet to do  that in a you know with good people and  not  have something really incredible come  out of it not necessarily that day yeah  but looking five years looking back five  years later and just going God that was  really worthwhile totally yeah  a few thoughts in no particular order I  would say the first is it depends my  recommendations depend a lot on where  you are in the Arc of your career in  life if you are  in full growth  hyperdrive mode and you are trying to  build both yourself and your  capabilities in a very concentrated way  where you're not necessarily focused on  family you maybe have fewer obligations  then if you're serious I think many  people should consider moving to an area  of high density  for a period of time it could be three  months it could be six months  could be longer but putting yourself in  a New York or an LA or a San Francisco  or Chicago or as new places develop I'll  give you one you might not expect same  Ottawa Canada where Shopify is based and  the presence and growth of Shopify has  spawned an entire ecosystem of startups  so there may be options outside of the  usual cast of characters  Pittsburgh and Duolingo similar effect  so there are more options than people  might recognize but  taking a journey and placing yourself  in a place where you can be in a very  active pinball machine where you may  interact serendipitously with many  different people from many different  worlds I think is in is is hard to  overstate the value of  and my  drive and my filtering function let's  just say because when I first got to the  Bay Area nobody cared about me I was  nobody I was driving my mom's used  minivan hand-me-down that had the seats  stolen out of the back were you in the  South Bay I was I was working in San  Jose  yeah I mean no disrespect to San Jose  I'm from the South Bay yeah but there's  a there's a bleakness to the South there  is there is a little bit of bleakness  and then I lived across the street in  this tiny apartment lived across the  street from the Jack in the Box in  Mountain View so it's not like I was  strolling onto the big stage and just  blowing people away oh I I I I grew up  right near Mountain View I'm very  familiar I probably skated the curves of  that jacket are you trained at the  Gold's Gym in off ring store it did  actually amazing yeah that was a great  gym that was a great gym that's a great  gym I don't think it's still going to go  there super late before my writing  sessions and it had the benefit of being  open really really late and wow rank  story I haven't thought about that in a  long time so the point is I also started  where a lot of people are starting  and what did I do  I put myself in a high density  environment  next what did I do knowing no one I  started to volunteer  at events where they had interesting  speakers and interesting people coming  to hear those speakers so I put myself  in Silicon Valley and then I began  volunteering for groups like s vase I  don't know if it exists anymore the  Silicon Valley Association of startup  entrepreneurs I think it was hi the in  this entrepreneur which is a very sort  of Indian or indian-american focused  organization that does a lot in the  realm of startups  and I would carry water I would take out  garbage I would check name badges I  would check people in nothing was too  low for me and I'll give you guys a tip  that will be obvious to some but  non-obvious to many  when you're volunteering a lot of folks  who volunteer do the absolute bare  minimum because they are not getting  paid  this is not going to get you noticed but  it sets a very low bar so that if you  volunteer at these events and someone's  dropping the ball or there's something  happening that needs fixing and you just  proactively do it the producers of these  events will notice you and this is what  happened over time over a few months and  then I got invited to join in on  meetings that were planning future  events and I eventually got to the point  where I was recruiting speakers and able  to set the agenda for an entire main  event  and then that's how I got to know say  Jack Canfield who is the co-creator of  Chicken Soup for the Soul and many  others who introduced me to my book  agent many many many many years later  Jack Canfield  but I was a nobody then you have to play  the long game  but you can be methodical on how you  play that and that is one approach just  as an example  for how to build your network which  snowballs over time don't hump every  vip's leg within 10 minutes of meeting  them  play it cool you know in the Gatherings  where that person is uh has a lot of  Demands on them is the last place you  want to do that right the way you're  going to make yourself most saliency to  that yeah the way you're going to make  yourself memorable with people like that  is to be very professional always on  time  predict what they are going to need or  problems they'll run into beforehand and  address them before they even think of  them and be easy to deal with  and  people like that high performers notice  these things they will make note of it  yeah the being easy to work with is  something that  um  I used to tell my graduate students in  postdocs I mean because the opposite of  that nobody wants yeah right nobody  wants that yeah especially in the  beginning like later okay great your  Steve Jobs you want to be difficult here  and there or a lot no problem yeah right  but in the beginning that can be a real  liability  you can make up for that if you are the  best in the world but in the very  beginning you probably won't be uh so  try to stack the deck in your favor  volunteering is a shortcut and that  would be one way of doing it another now  especially given the virtual communities  that exist so you have subreddits you  have online communities you have Twitter  groups you have Clubhouse you've got a  million different options which can be  overwhelming Clubhouse still going maybe  not I have no idea oh no I don't know  I'm not saying it's gone I just I  remember during the pandemic there were  some Clubhouse Gatherings that hopped on  there and but I've sort of forgotten to  together the the platform Affinity is  really fickle which is why I think to  the extent possible if you want to build  a world-class and I use that term very  deliberately  Network in record time just to give you  a nice headline I would say focus on the  uncrowded channel which is in person  it's out of fashion it's out of Vogue  going to a conference and actually  interacting with humans in the hallway  approaching panelists this is another  thing that I did I'll give it I'll give  another tip so very early on I would go  to conferences nobody cared who I was  nobody knew who it was fine and  I would study the panels let's say I'm  going to a big event like South by  Southwest  and I would this is what I did in 2007  which was just prior to the first book  coming out  and I would go to these various  in-person events I was focused mostly on  events that had uh the Thematic focus of  blogs we could come back that but blogs  were what podcasts were a few years ago  right they drove incredible traffic but  they were undervalued by mainstream  media undervalued by mainstream  Publishers Etc which meant there was an  Arbitrage opportunity in a way  and I would pick say a handful of  panels with topics I thought were super  interesting  and then the panel would end and what  would happen the panelists would get  rushed  by various folks because many of them  were well known who was not getting  rushed the moderator  I would go straight to the moderator and  I would talk to the moderator I'd thank  them for the panel I would be very  genuine none of it was made up and  talked them for a bit they generally  ask why I was there what I was  interested in I would mention whatever  that happened to be in this case it was  I'm finishing my first book where I had  my first book coming out soon I'm here  to hopefully meet people  who are involved with a b or c and then  if we hit it off which was not true  every time but if it seemed to be going  well I would say is I don't know anyone  here  I'm really sort of orphaned here making  my way through  uh this entire event is there anyone  else here you think I would get along  with who maybe I could buy a drink or  coffee and the vast majority of the time  they'd be like oh yeah you should meet  so and so and then I get the  introduction and then I would meet that  person I would have a genuine  interaction with that person and if it  made sense if things were going well I'd  do the same thing  is there anybody else here you think I  should just say hi to and I get along  with not who I can ask for something  and that wasn't deception I was being  honest like someone I could actually  Vibe with and if so would you mind  making the intro oh yeah sure no problem  many of those people are still my  friends  and by being surgical in that way not  trying to gather business cards to use a  really Antiquated  metaphor yeah people still hand them out  I guess depends on where you are  especially like Boston but uh if if  rather than trying to collect people as  Pokemon cards  developing say five three to five  deeper relationships through longer  conversations at an event that is what  directly LED ultimately to the hockey  stick for the four hour work week within  Tech within specifically San Francisco  so those would be a few approaches for  for building your network when you don't  have the ability to just walk up to say  Kevin Kelly and have a conversation that  came over time  yeah whether or not it's Health  practices or uh nutritional practices or  at meetings seems you're oriented toward  the uncrowded but very interesting  people in spaces but the key word there  I think is uncrowded and of course the  other keyword is interesting right I  mean it's not like you're standing in  the parking lot talking to whoever  happens to be there although that can be  interesting right there's a Serendipity  there and you know there's always things  to learn from people but in terms of  career advancement and and building new  ideas and foraging for information I'm  just struck how you've done that over  and over  um and again thank you for giving us  some insight into the process please uh  here's another one so I think there's a  tendency among people who want to  develop their Networks  or their relationships  to be [ __ ] not to get too  technical but that's a technical term  yeah yeah  and they want to tell other people they  are friends with someone more than they  want to develop skills or learn from  someone  this puts you in a very disadvantaged  position  because then that means all right you  want to become friends with Elon Musk  good luck  or you want to become friends with this  a-lister celebrity who everyone else  wants to meet good luck it's going to be  a crowded bloody path to get there  and by the way they've also certainly  developed really attuned defenses  against people like you I guess so it's  going to be hard on the other they have  staff to prevent oh yeah they have a  Phalanx of protectors to prevent you  from ever getting to that person  on the other hand if you're approaching  it from the standpoint of developing  skills learning and actually becoming  potential friends with someone  give you an example  you could go after you want to become  better at  boxing let's just make that up all right  maybe not the greatest example skiing  would be another one but let's let's  stick with boxing just because of the  way I'll explain it if you wanted to say  get personalized lessons from Floyd  Mayweather ain't gonna happen  okay let's go then maybe a step down out  of the pro ranks to gold medalist okay  if it's brand new gold medalist let's  just say like Oscar De La Hoya when he  was really The Golden Boy and it just  thrashed everyone still going to be hard  what about the silver medalist who just  had a bad day  when he had that last bout against Oscar  De La Hoya potentially right from a  technical perspective  from a personal connection perspective  you may have more in common with that  person or a bronze medalist and they can  get you 70 80 90 of the way there and by  the way you probably don't have the  physical attributes to make to 100  anyway  if you're coming to it this late  and  you could get in many cases one-on-one  lessons whether in person or virtually  with someone who is of that caliber  they're in the same front of the pack as  the names I just mentioned maybe not as  famous  100 bucks 200 bucks per hour  for a lot of people that is Within Reach  and I'm not sure what the value of  saying one knows somebody very famous is  it's just never been something I've  oriented to it's a common orientation  though yeah and I think that's true for  a lot of things like many people use say  psychedelics because they want to tell  other people the story  that they have of doing psychedelics  right they're not doing it intrinsically  for what they hope to get out of that  experience maybe there's part of them  but it's more the social signaling and  validation they get when they project  that out at a group dinner into a story  that they can tell and that's true for  many things so one of the questions I  ask myself with all sorts of things if I  could never talk about this would I do  it  what a great  great right thing to think about right  like if I could if I could have let's  just say we didn't know each other and I  was like okay  I'm earlier in my career let's apply  some constraints so I'm not where I am I  still want to do a b and c in the public  eye maybe I want to build a podcast  whoever  if I could meet with you but I could  never tell a soul  would I do it I don't know would you I  would thank you I would but I would too  but but for a lot of folks if they  meaning I'd meet with you I'm not saying  I'd meet with me by the way  that'd be with me you know the believe  me I meet with me all the time and  sometimes it's pretty unpleasant yeah  and and that can be applied to all sorts  of things right it's like and it's it's  a useful question because I asked myself  this  for examining your motivations and I'm  not saying one motivation is always  better than another but it's it's you  should at least be aware of your driving  motivations because you can end up  playing games you're not even aware  you're playing and that's how you end up  I think getting into a lot of trouble in  life one of the ways so that would be a  question I might apply I apply other  questions like there's a great question  uh that Seth Godin applies who really I  admire tremendously and has built an  incredibly  unorthodox unique life for himself and  his family he's he's zigged when  everyone would expect him to zag and I I  and he always has a defensible logic  behind it and much like Derek sivers but  most people have probably heard the  hypothetical question like what would  you do if you knew you couldn't fail  right or what would you do if you  couldn't fail and Seth turns that around  I think that's a good question but he  turns around he said what would you do  if you knew you were gonna fail  in terms of identifying what you would  do for the process  right what would you do if you knew it  was going to fail okay you're  considering these five different  projects let's say they're all going to  fail but you still have to choose one of  the five  which would you choose yeah that's a  great question  um  much harder to answer yeah and you know  at the same time I'm called back to uh  when I was a graduate student and still  now with the podcast uh I have this um  litmus test which is you know is the  experiment that I'm working on  the one that I want to be working on  most is the podcast that I'm working on  the one that I want to be working on  most I mean there's truly no other  podcast I'd rather be having today than  this one right and the moment I'm  starting to think oh I wish I was doing  that thing over there I realize I'm off  Target I'm off Target and um I think  that asking really good questions is  something clearly that you're very good  at and uh getting a little bit deeper  into your process around that do you  write those things down like is there a  Notebook someplace in the Kingdom of uh  of Tim Ferriss in Austin or elsewhere  um that says you know those questions  that that essentially those questions  are written are they yeah I literally  have a document with questions that I've  gathered from Seth printed out and at  the Airbnb where I'm staying here so I  brought it with you I printed it out  here and then I went through and I read  it last night and I was highlighting  questions from past interviews I've had  with him on my podcast to revisit his  questions  so I I was literally doing that last  night over dinner and I collect  questions I collect questions if I am  reading a magazine and I come across a  good question I take I take a photo or I  capture it somehow in notes or in  Evernote which I know is kind of  old-fashioned these days but I've used  it for everything so the critical masses  and Beyond enormous and I do collect and  revisit these things I capture them in  journals as well but I I absolutely  capture good questions when I find them  questions are so powerful for the brain  I don't want to go into this in too much  detail because I have a lot more  questions for you but uh we just wrapped  a series on Mental Health that will come  out later this year with Paul conti and  he um is brilliant as we both know and  uh does truly important work and  um and he pointed to the value of asking  really good questions about oneself and  because of the way that  questions that are really directed at  self-inquiry cue up the subconscious so  you ask the question and unlike a  statement or a meme  um the brain works with that in the days  and hours after asking the question in  ways that  um simple declarative statements  probably don't ping the system the same  way which is probably why we can see so  many points of wisdom and Truth  everywhere and it doesn't necessarily  transform us but asking really good  questions really does seem to transform  us yeah there's uh  I think judging people by their  questions is  it's also a shortcut to assessing and  learning a lot about how someone  functions and what makes them tick  I think this will Tara who said you know  judge a man by his questions by his  answers something along those lines but  when in doubt attribute to Voltaire it  sounds good does sound good and I think  about this a lot I do think about the  questions and I refine the questions  that I ask myself especially while  journaling because it's easier to  cross-examine and stress test your own  certainty and beliefs when they are  captured on paper  or  digitally on a laptop for instance so I  I do  routinely revisit certain questions that  I found  helpful over time I mean one that people  can play with is with whatever is really  causing you consternation or stress at  the moment some kind of decision a  relationship  business could be anything just what  might this look like if it were easy  right what might this look like if it  were easy if it had to be easy if that  were possible what might it look like  and that could apply to anything I could  apply to anything you know could apply  to could apply Fitness it's like look if  you do really intense kettlebell swings  twice a week with proper weight and load  and time under tension and you do  push-ups a few times a week and handle a  couple of other  elements you can get in pretty good  shape it's so simple but  hits a lot I mean hits your entire  posterior chain okay fine do some  push-ups and some core work  but if you're not exercising at all  because you've made the assumption that  it's  four hours five hours a week rather than  completely remove that objective  and call it  just impractical can you ratchet down  the scale how far can you ratchet down  the scale until you have no excuses all  right  I'll just be one one example language  learning Tech investing it applies to  everything  yeah making life easier is something  that definitely gets my vote yeah making  it easier and making it more elegant  right the more pieces in your life you  have floating around the more context  the more extraneous loose connections  the harder your life is going to be the  cognitive overload or overhead is really  high so I'm always looking for maybe  like Japanese  in a flower ranger it's like okay how  many pieces can I remove while still  like maintaining the essence of what I'm  trying to achieve you and Rick Rubin man  I'm telling you you know two people I am  fortunate enough to know personally and  that I have tremendous respect for and  you know the work and uh is self-evident  you know it's really remarkable so uh  rewind that and listen to that segment  right there folks I'm telling you I've  worked hard to apply it because it's not  my default and boy does it make a  significant Improvement to simplify  simplify simplify take some thought and  question asking it's like you just can't  delete things at random so you get down  to some fixed number but  um I'd like to ask you about another  area where you really have seemed to see  around corners and this is one that  actually carried with it significant  risk  um not necessarily risk to health into  life  but risk in terms of outside perceptions  and that's psychedelics as you know I've  substantially changed my view on this uh  we don't need to go into my former  stance on I talked about that when you  were gracious enough to host me on your  podcast for a second time uh I'd done  some psychedelics recreationally as a  kid it was correlated with not so great  times in my life stayed away from them  then eventually Revisited MDMA in  particular from a therapeutic standpoint  found tremendous benefit again  therapeutically with a medical doctor  again these drugs are illegal soon to  change perhaps hopefully and we'll talk  about that but uh it's becoming clear  from the controlled Studies by Robin  Carter Harris there are many others okay  Nolan Williams others that these drugs  have enormous potential to help relieve  depression trauma  help people explore their psyche their  mind for sake of feeling better doing  better in the world for leaning into  life not tune in drop out but  um you know to really lean into life  with more purpose and more satisfaction  in some cases they've really have saved  lives I think um  what was your mindset around  psychedelics when you first started  exploring them what  what led you to overcome the inevitable  you know fear Gap there  because you do seem like somebody who  takes value in your health right you're  not Reckless you may have been more  adventurous in the past with things like  I hate the word but biohacking and  self-experimentation than you are now  but but you obviously have some  self-preservation mechanism intact we  learn we learn we learn  um what was your mindset around at the  time and then I want to get to what  you've learned from it  um and frankly the tremendous  efforts that you've put that are now  translating to tremendous value for  really millions of people and ultimately  I think it's going to be billions of  people  um by establishing funding for the  pioneering research in this area helping  to promote the movement of these  compounds from illegal to legal in the  therapeutic setting  so on and so on so take us back to  um your first thoughtful exploration of  psychedelics what'd that look like  you're like oh mushrooms I'll eat them  was that it or was it  um or was it a a dedicated research  process and who'd you talk to what was  it all about  so let's go way back to my undergrad  experience and  there are many reasons that I ended up  going to Princeton I think I was very  lucky to get in my SAT scores because I  can never finish the damn test I have so  much of a perfectionist I get stuck and  ended up not doing terribly well but  through essays and other things  ultimately was able to go part of the  job let me interrupt you and just say I  think at this point we can say they were  lucky to have you well thank you for  saying that yeah thank you for saying  yeah great institution you've done great  and you're a a great um uh poster on the  wall for them yeah oh really I hope so  really really yeah I I just want to say  it because you're not going to and I  think it's important that these are  great institutions of great minds go  through there and  that you know Einstein went through  there yeah and uh and their success  rests not just on the Einsteins but also  on the student body and what they go out  into the world and do and not just in  the realm of science so yeah really  they're lucky to have had you yeah thank  you Andrew I studied Chinese in a room  where Einstein used to teach it's pretty  cool to set foot and spend time weekly  in a space that was shared by some of  these people amazing it really it really  gets the imagination firing  if we go back to that chapter in my life  I was initially a Psychology major with  focus on Neuroscience so I wanted to be  a neuroscientist and there are many  reasons for that I have  neurodegenerative disease on both sides  of my family so Parkinson's and  Alzheimer's  so that was certainly a personal driving  interest  in terms of looking at mechanisms  understanding what Therapeutics existed  or did not exist how things were  developing in the research  and while I was there  which later I ended up Switching gears  and transferring to focus on language  acquisition and East Asian studies hence  the Chinese that I mentioned earlier and  Japanese and Korean but on the  Neuroscience side  or a lot of cool breakthroughs also that  came out of uh Princeton around that  time looking at the amazing discovery of  say uh neuronal uh  I want to say Regenesis but neurogenesis  in the hippocampus exactly yeah exactly  so there was quite a bit happening at  that time I was a subject I loved  volunteering for studies just to try to  get an inside look at how things were  done in some of Daniel kahneman's  experiments so it was a cool time to be  there and  within the first two years I want to say  I had my first experience recreationally  with mushrooms  and  Looking Back Now I mean I'm horrified by  the lack of control and meaning not  control but lack of supervision right I  mean the setting the set and setting  ended up being fine nothing terrible  happened but there were a lot of ways it  could have gone sideways but that first  experience and I must have consumed in  retrospect just a dizzying amount of  mushrooms I mean it might be in excess  of five grams it would have been more  yeah just knowing what I know now it  would have been kids don't do this at  all don't do that I'm not I'm not gonna  say don't do it at home don't do it at  all yeah yeah please I don't think I  actually don't think uh the young  developing brain should be exposed to  psychedelics we could talk we could talk  about that yeah I'm gonna take my stance  I'm gonna take it for now yeah I mean in  in the world in which we live in the US  um I would I would totally agree with  you  um there are some interesting cultural  exceptions in other places uh where  there things are more set up to  provide for that type of use but I  certainly would not recommend it but but  coming back to my my recreational  experience my my subjective experience  was so bizarre  and my experience of time so non-linear  my experience of self  so different from anything I had  experienced up to that point  and therefore my construction of reality  being so completely unlike anything  I had experienced was enough to make me  want to learn about these compounds and  very early on  still have a scan of it somewhere I  think it was in 1998 or 99 I actually  wrote a paper one of my junior papers  was focused on examining potential  similarities between REM sleep and  LSD  lsd25 and  looking at some of the patterns of of  neural activity of course we can do a  lot more now with with the tools we have  available but from a scientific  perspective I was very curious about how  much we knew  and how much we didn't know and I would  say that latter category gets me more  excited in a way and I'm like okay  how how much room is there for growth  here right because if if we're just  putting on the finishing touches with  marginal you know incremental  improvements on something that we feel  like we've largely figured out that's  less interesting to me than something  that baffles most people examining them  on some level  and there was a professor named Barry  Jacobs who was doing some very  interesting work he did a lot of work  looking at the  serotonergic systems and uh did a lot of  work with cats ultimately I could not do  personally the animal work required of  the sort of indentured servitude that I  would I think he wrote someplace once  you know you you said you know when  confronted with the uh the prospect of  installing a a computer printer into the  header jacket on the back of a cat head  they totally had those like those little  VGA ports on the back of these cats  heads because cats sleep a lot and so  they're interesting to study yeah a lot  of that cats very few Laboratories work  on cats any longer it's mostly a mouse  still some non-human primate work my  laboratory is essentially shut down  um or is in the process of shutting down  even our Mouse work I'd much prefer to  work on humans they can give consent and  they house themselves and um the animal  research thing is tough for any for any  sentient being yeah it's tough for what  it's worth the cats seem pretty happy  like they were just sleeping I mean the  the ports were for tracking so the cats  were pretty I mean they were just normal  cats the cats were fine but I would have  been we would have been injecting  retroviruses into rats and then  perfusing them which means bleeding them  to death uh to avoid bruising of the  tissue because then if you're going to  take thin slices and scans you didn't  want to have bruising and and I just  couldn't I just couldn't do it I think  it's important I do think  I do think there's a place for it but I  couldn't do it so that's why I  transferred out but the the point I was  trying to make is that I had the  experience and then I had that drive the  scientific interest  and then I had a probably one experience  per year  for a few years after that and  what I noticed for myself personally  because I've suffered from major  depressive disorder an extended  depressive episodes let's just say on  average three to four a year and by by  extended even before you had started  even before from a young age yeah from  very young age and I would say so let's  just call it three to four on average a  year those could last each a few weeks  or a few months I mean this is this is a  a very high percentage my total year  and when I had these higher dose  experiences with with mushrooms so we're  talking about philosophy mushrooms and  then if we're looking at the molecule  that's being examined scientifically  psilocybin  I noticed this Afterglow effect that was  really durable and that that was an  antidepressant effects or a mood  elevating effect that lasted far longer  than the half-life could explain right  because it's four to six hours you're  you're kind of on the other side  and I would experience this this  Afterglow effect for three to six months  and that raised all sorts of interesting  questions  what the hell is going on here is it the  content is it some structural change  there were a lot of unanswered questions  for me and then I had a very very scary  experience that led me to completely  stop use of psychedelics where again  uncontrolled environment ended up in  rural uh in rural New York coming out of  my trip standing in the middle of the  road in the middle of the night with  headlights coming at me goodness  gracious so you don't want to do that  yeah and I was like okay too dangerous  were you taking them alone is that how  that is taking them with two friends and  my two friends without telling me just  went for a walk and left me alone  these are powerful compounds yeah you're  you're playing with nuclear power like  these these are the this is the nuclear  power of  like psychological or  uh psycho-emotional surgery is is the  way I encourage people to think about  them  and I stopped using any psychedelics  completely I was still very interested  in them and but I basically hit pause  and I didn't revisit that until let's  call it 2012 2013 where I was still  struggling with major depression  disorder and I saw my girlfriend at the  time completely transformed by  supervised facilitated use of in this  case Ayahuasca which was not quite as  common as it is in conversation  at the time  and she did that in South America but  she  not only explained her experience but I  was able to see the transformation in  her that seemed to have some durability  over time and that is when I started  stepping back into  researching psychedelics looking at what  had been published in the last let's  just call it 10 years as at that point  in time and  thinking about how I would approach it  systematically  with safeguards with proper supervision  and basically approaching it the way I  would have approached any of the topics  in the for our body  and that is what led me back into along  with a number of other interventions I  should say so I wasn't betting the farm  on psychedelics I also started TM at  that point I was I was skewed yourself  some people might uh trans uh  transcendental medications these are  like four to ten day meditation Retreats  this was actually much shorter it was a  two or three day training and you're  visiting the instructor I want to say  it's once or twice a day probably once a  day and getting up to speed and I did  this because I was going through a  period of acute stress this is finishing  the four hour chef  this is actually probably in the Years  preceding that and I had one friend who  I'd seen really change from let's just  call hyperkinetic high anxiety to low  anxiety and he said you have the time  you have the money pay for the course  just take it yes there are all these  criticisms of TM yes there are all these  weird historical anecdotes of people  trying to levitate and all this  weirdness just ignore that I'm trying to  levitate if you actually levitate then  we got to have a discussion it seems  like yeah why not you know every kid  every kid tries all sorts of things give  it a go uh he's like just put that aside  because I kept coming up with pushback  and he's like look  all I'm saying is it's like a warm bath  for your mind that you take twice a day  and it'll chill you the [ __ ] out so try  it and I was like okay fine it's a good  endorsement I was like I was like at  this point I was I had been burning the  candle at both ends so intensely it's  like okay so there's TM and then I began  examining how I might approach notice I  didn't just jump into using them I was  like how could I approach taking  psychedelics in a sequence in a logical  sequence  with proper protections with safety  assurances and that took me  probably a month or two and I was right  in the middle of things in Northern  California you have access to a lot  and only then did I start looking at  having my own experiences and lo and  behold I mean I'll I'll cut to the chase  but the the personal  outcome and there are many  different benefits and risks I should  make very clear these things can be  extremely dangerous in certain ways  generally not physiologically but they  can be dangerous  I would say instead of three to four  times per year on average I probably  have one depressive episode every two  years that's a significant Improvement  right I mean from a quality of life  perspective those are two different  people  and uh that then led me to and I as I  did with all my workouts right I took  copious notes over the span I mean now  we're looking at 10 plus years uh so if  I were to ever write another book uh it  would probably be related to all of the  really  fine details of the experiments and my  learnings including some of the more  bizarre things over the last 10 years  but it would be a it would be just a  beast to create so with with  psychedelics experiences with  psychedelics psychedelics and sort of  psychedelic adjacent uh non-ordinary  experiences of Consciousness which I  think often are touching at edges of the  same thing uh which which is going to be  controversial for some folks but to to  come back to the storyline just to put a  bow on that  when I saw the personal outcomes for me  the anecdata from friends who are  facilitators who have worked with  thousands of people right which is a  pretty good sample size still anecdote  but these are people who are very smart  who keep records and I believe that  these people have spotted patterns that  are only going to be possible to test  and verify over the next five to ten  years so I at least as a  is a means of generating hypotheses I  take these people very seriously uh  and then I started to connect with  Scientists whose work I had read like  Roland Griffiths at Johns Hopkins  began looking at the most compelling  data related to say MDMA assisted  Psychotherapy and  complex PTSD  I I made the  commitment to myself that as soon as I  had enough money to move the dial  because I really felt like these tools  were so outside of the normal Paradigm  of  Psychiatry and pharmacology  and that made me very excited because it  was uncrowded there was very little  funding coming into the space  it was high leverage and I looked at it  just as I've looked at my many startup  Investments uh limited downside risk  really high upside potential and I  should say before that I had already  been funding in a very small way science  so the first check I ever wrote was  personally to Adam gazzali's Lab at UCSF  yeah great lab which at the time  was looking at software he's not going  to like this description that I'm going  to simplify it software that might  attenuate or reverse age-related  cognitive impairment uh specifically  related to various aspects of of  attention and  that was my first foray into funding  early stage science which was very  analogous to me of uh to funding early  stage startups and then later on to  touch on the reputational thing I know  this is a TED talk so thank you for  listening no this is great please please  uh you're always so gracious on your  podcast this is what people want this is  certainly what I want to hear so so on  the reputational side you're right that  at the time especially let's just call  it 2013 to 2015 this was not a Nat a  comfortable National conversation of any  type yeah I wouldn't have had this  conversation back then no way I'd lose I  don't know that I would have lost my job  it just would have raised a lot of  eyebrows and now such studies are  happening yeah the perception yeah the  perception was  that these are a professional third rail  at the very least right also illegal  therefore if I talk about them am I  giving someone probable cause am I going  to get myself in some type of really  tricky legal situation Etc there are a  lot of considerations but  I tested that just like I was saying I  like to capture my assumptions on paper  so I can stress test and I was like okay  I think that might be true most people I  know think that is true but is it true  how could we test to see if that is true  or not and I decided to crowdfund for  a Hopkins pilot study looking at  psilocybin for treatment resistant  depression and I thought to myself okay  we have we have a couple of  a couple of things falling in our favor  here number one depression does not  discriminate so across socioeconomic  classes across gender across race this  is a problem  almost everyone knows someone who takes  antidepressants who is still depressed  okay  treatment resistant depression therefore  is the indication psilocybin is the  intervention  let me crowdfund and I did that  throughout the time crowdrise which was  co-founded by Edward Norton who had  become a friend and was the actor who's  very smart very very very smart also one  of the best investors I've ever met  which a lot of people don't know very  bright guy  so crowdfunded and I also like to put my  money where my mouth is I said okay guys  I'm gonna see this like I'm putting in X  the goal is to raise I think it was  eighty thousand something like that for  the following study and then I was like  let's see let's see what happens and  there was  basically zero negative  blowback and not only once was there no  discernible negative blowback a number  of people and this was deliberate I  wanted to see this a number of people  came out of the woodwork to support in a  bigger way and I was like oh okay I see  you a bunch a handful of folks I knew  and I was like oh interesting okay there  are at least a half a dozen folks who  are studying the same thing or paying  attention to the same thing and then I  just got Bolder I was like okay if I  tested that  let me push  and then let's see what happens and I'll  wait and lo and behold  I realized that the perception did not  match the reality the reality was if  you're talking about indications that  cause an incredible amount of suffering  for a very large number of people  even those who are anti-drug per se just  say no to drugs want Solutions and the  current treatments for many of these  things do not work very well and in the  best of cases or often masking symptoms  and not addressing root causes I would  say so at that point I just went whole  hog and I said okay look I like to think  that I am exactly what you see is what  you get right the person you talk to off  camera the person you talk to on camera  same and if I start feeling like I have  too much to protect I want to do  something to counteract that in other  words if if  if I feel like I need to censor my true  feelings and beliefs maybe not share my  hardships perhaps not  promote certain things because I have a  reputation to lose that's a fragile  position  I want to be as anti-fragile as possible  and so by talking about this I viewed it  as a way of inoculating myself against  fear of reputation loss like okay let me  push this like I'll ride this horse  other people might not but I wanted to  remove the stigma for funding purposes  hopefully open up federal funding that's  starting to happen now from different  agencies  and then to focus on access and  reduction of cost and insurance  reimbursement and so on so I set a game  plan let's call it maybe five years ago  and I've just been slowly methodically  executing on that since and uh the  reason I chose this to focus on and I've  funded other things but I've really  focused on this mental health  Therapeutics which is not limited to  psychedelics  we can talk about some other things that  I find interesting but psychedelics are  like I said what makes it attractive  very uncrowded  you can do a lot with a small amount of  money unlike saying cancer research can  be very hard like okay you're Deca  billionaire great maybe you can do  something interesting and I'm sure other  people could but if you have twenty  thousand fifty thousand dollars it's  going to be hard to make a dent there  and psychedelics you can actually still  make a difference and very high leverage  in part because  these compounds seem to challenge much  of what we assume to be true about  treating Mental Health  and uh so that's uh that makes for an  attractive bet so that's where I've been  been going yeah I'm so glad you shared  that with us and that you did that  exploration  um and that you've been spearheading the  funding efforts uh you know  this podcast has a uh a premium channel  that's for raising funds for scientific  studies we are in the process now making  our first four uh contributions one of  those includes uh work in Nolan Williams  laboratory at Stanford combining  transcranial magnetic stimulation with  um studies of ibogaine and uh 5meo DMT  maybe a few other things but basically  he's free to do what he wants with the  funds we trust him to do great work but  that again was inspired by you right a  podcast with a scientific um slant  certainly  um this podcast obviously has a  scientific slant but the idea of doing  philanthropy for the sorts of work that  really deserves funding and exploration  and um by the way  um in thinking about other hybrid things  that would be fun to do I mean I would  love to uh contribute and join those  efforts because the work to continue to  raise funding for psychedelic studies  and all these great Laboratories  continues right it continues yes and  you've rallied a collection of  um some pretty uh powerful people to  contribute to this and I know you've  joined arms with Michael Pollan in many  ways do you want to talk about the  fellowships that you guys put together I  find that really cool you've got  fellowships uh in the works or maybe  already happening at UC Berkeley is that  right UC Berkeley yeah so the what what  I try to do and for people who want to  check it out it's it's the name of the  foundation is sisei foundation and let  me explain that for a second so it's  s-a-i-s-e-i so SCI savefoundation.org I  speak Japanese I want there's an  exchange student and speak read write it  still to this day pretty well sightsee  can mean a lot of things it means  rebirth in Japanese and I've seen what  can only be described or can certainly  be described as rebirth in so many  clinical outcomes  that I thought it was appropriate to use  and  what I've tried to do with the  foundation is  I think do what I'm pretty good at which  is trying to peek around corners and  find something to prototype right so  just like the CGM and like all right how  can I just getting hold of a Dexcom back  then when it was just for type 1  diabetics was was hard it was something  that you have to actually go under the  skin so it's it's like taking a barbecue  prong and putting it under your  abdominal skin it was not comfortable  can you describe your  um cortisol level and uh subjective  terms when you're at home you got this  thing and you're about to implant it and  you don't have any precedent it's not  like this is you know like levels or one  of these other uh cgms that are out  there United stamp the thing in you can  look on Instagram and see someone else  do it there's nothing like that so  you're at home wondering if you're going  to secure your liver yeah I'm I'm at  home doing it myself and I'm sweating  like a stuck pig I'm sitting there I'm  like oh my God I don't even know if I  can is your girlfriend there like to  support you in case you yeah I think at  the time she wasn't because she was  squeamish and didn't want to see it and  I'm so I'm sitting there at my kitchen  table I remember this God I'm sweating  just thinking about it and  no videos to watch and uh wasn't really  supposed to have it in the first place  and uh the device for readout by the way  no iPhone right right so it's like this  janky  pager looking thing that had a readout  that made you think you were playing  pong or something and it was very the  green the green tint screen yeah  font is so primitive  and uh  put this thing under my skin would tape  I would cut a Ziploc bag and put it on  top and and masking tape it to my skin  to take showers because otherwise it  wouldn't work  and it was it was great and I'll just  say that I don't use Associated you  realize you said it was great I did I  did say it was great because gay wedding  and it was I was afraid but it gave me a  lot of insight okay and then once I had  The Insider work a course of a handful  of weeks then I felt like I didn't  really need it anymore and that was also  just uh  heavy tax to pay you don't have to wear  that thing around look like you have a  you know what is it called a colostomy  bag or something it's just like it was  big it was bulky so  just like I did that  I wanted to do a proof of concept right  the goal was can I use this for a  healthy normal applications will the  insights be actionable  and they were lo and behold similarly  with the foundation since I'm dealing  with smaller amounts of money and I'm  not uh in the billionaire club by any  stretch of the imagination  and science can be expensive I'm looking  for small bets where can I pilot  something that if successful will be  emulated or can be scaled  and so on the say the crowdfunding for  for the Hopkins treatment resistant  depression pilot study we ended up  exceeding the goal they were able to  recruit more subjects in the case of UC  Berkeley Michael pollen and I partnered  on this and my Foundation funded it the  ferris UC Berkeley journalism Fellowship  psychedelic journalism Fellowship is  providing funding to up and coming  journalists  who want to focus on psychedelics as  their beat which to this date has not  been financially feasible  you just don't have the space to do  really long-form investigators and  investigative work  uh the Hope being that these journalists  can apply their skills and their  dedication to examining different facets  of the Psychedelic ecosystem therapeutic  potential uh regulatory issues ETC in a  way that can  shape and inform National and  international discourse in a very  critical way because these things are  not a Panacea there's a lot of claims  that are made about these that are  totally unbacked by any type of Science  and there are a lot of charlatans and so  I want wanted to also invite really  competent really good journalists to the  table who might want to watch for Bad  actors I think that's really important  and so this Fellowship has been been uh  has been awarding fellows with these  grants and I think it's a relatively  small amount of money it's like ten  thousand dollars per something like that  but the outcomes have been amazing we  had a huge I want to say it was 7 000  word piece that was one of the main  features in Rolling Stone magazine huge  piece in National Geographic focused on  iboga and fair trade and some of the  implications for  uh local harvesting and or over  harvesting all the Dynamics present in  that which I think has some incredible  promise for particular forms of uh  opioid use opioid use disorder in  particular but  uh that has been a huge success so the  hope is that other journalism schools  will say that's a great idea and I will  have de-risked it for some other  philanthropist or Foundation or  government say director and agency to  say okay well green like that right  because I've done it and it's been  received very well and it's had a real  impact on how things are moving along  another one would be say at Harvard  Poplar this is at Harvard Law School it  was the first is the first dedicated  team focused on law policy and  regulation related psychedelics from a  legal perspective super important super  important super super important also  another pilot let's just call it uh  proof of concept that Sisley Foundation  funded was  helping to develop curricula for I think  it was Yale Johns Hopkins and NYU  effectively a an accreditation or module  they could put into their existing  Psychiatry MD uh  programs such that people could develop  the skills necessary and the  understanding necessary to administer  psychedelic therapies if and when they  become legal prescribable which if I  understand correctly it  sounds like within the next 12 to 24  months  MDMA assisted Psychotherapy for the  treatment of trauma is likely to become  legal in the hands of  psychiatrists at least it may be certain  clinical psychologists as well in the  U.S is that right through the through  the efforts of the maps group yeah  through through the efforts of maps.org  and we're Dublin many others  that is the tip of the spear so I think  anyone who's interested in psychedelics  should have a vested interest in  supporting those efforts  not because we know everything works I  want to be clear  not because we know our priori that all  these things do all the things no but if  if MDMA fails  it's going to be very hard to draft  it'll be impossible to draft on that  with  commands that are more difficult to  administer like psilocybin which would  be next in line for alcohol use disorder  also major depressive disorder so I I  really feel that just like everything  I've talked about whether it's  networking  putting together for our body  or trying to change National policy and  say uh  reclassification of these compounds  getting them out of schedule one to some  extent  you want to break it down into its  constituent pieces you want to do an 80  20 analysis figure out what the critical  few are and then put them in a logical  sequence and execute the plan  one of the greatest weaknesses in the  Psychedelic ecosystem is there are a lot  of people who just want to do all the  things and save all the people and all  the animals and all the places all at  once and that just doesn't work very  well there are also some really good  people who are executing and we could  talk about the for-profit side and so on  but I've been very very very pleased  with the outcomes that scissor  Foundation has been able to achieve with  very limited money I'm prouder of those  outcomes than I am of the startup record  and the startup record is pretty good  and it's the same lens I'm using the  same  the same filters and the same approach  uh which is kind of what I'm always  looking for I'm looking for stuff  that'll translate across Fields if  possible and then you mentioned one like  TMS I think TMS very interesting  transcranial magnetic stimulation yeah  which at one point was  um more commonly used to inhibit  specific brain areas this is a  non-invasive technique uh I've had it  done whereas over my motor cortex and  you're tapping your finger and all of a  sudden you can't tap your fingers it's  pretty eerie but now it can be used to  stimulate at particular frequencies  enhance neuroplasticity and and in  combination with psychedelics is the  it's kind of the burning question now  can you get a a synergistic effect of  TMS and and uh psychedelics maybe  um not just during the the psilocybin or  Ebola Journey but in the days and weeks  after when we know for sure a lot of  plasticity is still occurring so keep  the plasticity on board or accelerate it  yeah so TMS uh also is a monotherapy  very interesting to me for depression  anxiety even substance use disorders  super interesting and there are many  different protocols all sorts of  different technology uh I would say low  intensity or low power ultrasound also  super interesting uh for various various  applications potentially to addiction so  I'm not to be clear a  card carrying  evangelist for psychedelics I am a  proponent of looking for high leverage  on crowded Bets with limited downside  and testing them out and  very optimistic about psychedelics  if anyone listening has a family history  of say schizophrenia borderline  personality disorder which we might  which this is being very simplistic but  categorize or describe as more chaotic  conditions compared to hyper-rigid  conditions like an OCD or anorexia  nervosa  uh chronic depression Etc then we can  talk about why some of these  psychedelics at least some of the  classical psychedelics seem to have  cross efficacy with multiple conditions  but  psychedelic seemed very helpful for  certain types of hyper rigidity when you  get into in schizophrenia and borderline  personality disorder they can be really  heavily contraindicated not to say they  cause those con those conditions but  they can precipitate the onset of those  symptoms and for that reason can be very  destabilizing and dangerous for for  certain people  however that's where something like  metabolic Psychiatry comes in and the  use of ketosis in the ketogenic diet  which appears to be  very effective in some patients for that  grouping of say more chaotic conditions  which is very exciting so I'm interested  in in any tools that are off the beaten  path that seem to raise interesting  questions that have not been answered in  a satisfying way yet in medicine  and I think we're still largely in the  Dark Ages with respect to Psychiatry oh  I think the best psychiatrists would  agree with you yeah and and the best  psychiatrists uh  and the best scientists  and the best fill in the blank are  acutely aware of the limitations of our  current methods and the limitations of  our current knowledge so I think the  mark of a good thinker the mark of a  good scientist the mark of a good fill  in the blank anything is someone who  says I'd have no idea or we have no idea  a lot and hopefully they also say let's  go figure it out or try to try some  things and I I really want to thank you  for sharing that narrative especially  because it makes clear that you brought  the same systematic process of using and  asking excellent questions to arrive at  solutions to arrive at more questions to  fund areas of inquiry and to do it all  in this really structured way as you  said from policy all the way down to  like how many grams or uh you know X of  of some substance somebody might take I  mean I think Matthew Johnson's  laboratory at Hopkins uh Roland  Griffiths uh Robin cardard Harris at  UCSF Nolan Williams the maps group Rick  Dublin Peter Hendrix at University of  Alabama looking under cocaine addiction  yeah other things yeah you Michael  pollen um you know I'm leaving some  names out here and I don't want to take  anything away from the um classic uh as  they're called explorers of psychedelics  and and writers about psychedelics but  we are in the moment of a Renaissance  now and it's important that this have a  lot of fuel so we'll put a link to  um your philanthropy efforts and and the  journalism uh fellowships as well  because I think there there's going to  be a lot of interest there in a huge  supporter of what you're doing as as you  know and I just think it's the way great  science and clinical progress is made so  yeah  um thanks Andrew yeah it's I uh which  brings me to another parallel topic you  know it used to be that meditation and  psychedelics where you have nested in  the same territory this would be in the  late 60s early 70s the birth of places  like esselen Etc  or the consequence of the Dual  exploration of those things meditation  sort of escaped from the psychedelics  umbrella and vice versa  um starting sometime in the mid-2000s  when neuroimaging became a little bit  more accessible and you know I think  nowadays if you told anybody okay  um you know meditation is good for you  can help uh ratchet down your anxiety  give more self-awareness  um you know improve sleep and on and on  maybe even give some insight into  Consciousness no one's going to bulk  there's a lot of studies there's  thousands of studies my laboratory's  done a few of them there are other  Laboratories who have done uh far more  the book altered traits is the one that  comes to mind the group out of Wisconsin  it was early to early to the game on  this  um in any event you talked about TM  um I'm curious from a practical  standpoint do you still meditate daily  do you do meditation Retreats  um what sorts of meditative practices do  you have because I realize this can be  done walking writing is some form of  meditation what sorts of formal  practices do you still engage in now  yeah I do 10 to 20 minutes in the  morning  so I am not currently doing the TM twice  daily 20 minutes I think that would be  better for me probably do you set a  clock and you or yeah I'll set a clock  uh which would be more of the  concentration practice of say a TM where  you're repeating a mantra honestly it  could be any  in my opinion some TM purists will balk  at this but uh it could be really any  nonsense syllable could be a word  although I think something without any  attached meaning is probably more  beneficial for a host of reasons so it  could be a concentration practice with  20 minutes of sitting  it might also be a guided meditation and  I have no vested interest in this app  but I think the waking up app by Sam  Harris is fantastic  I have used the introductory course  which is Sam leading you through my  catnip which is a logical progression of  skill development from day one two three  and and forward I have gone through that  course multiple times when I'm getting  back on the horse for meditation as a  bit of a reboot once you develop I think  a certain degree of awareness and  mindfulness I do think there are other  activities that probably  allow you the parallel experience of  doing one thing while experiencing some  of the benefits of meditation  and so for me I wonder at times are the  benefits of meditation the concentration  practice itself is it just sitting still  with my eyes closed closed down  regulating my system a little bit  activating my parasympathetic and not  rushing or doing anything for 20 minutes  is that it maybe  is it  simply correcting my posture for 20  minutes  how do I weight these different inputs  and the the short answer is you probably  don't need to know but I have found that  spending time in silence in nature  without anything to do disallowing  myself from doing things no note-taking  no reading Etc and spending I I have  spent a number of extended fasts in  nature just like water only by myself no  talking no reading no writing what's  extended seven days generally wow so  you're camping in nature with just water  yep that's it by myself  and there are risks associated with that  right you got to be careful not stupid  about it but  that does a lot for me with some  persistent benefits are there some  favorite places that you've gone into  nature it doesn't have to be too fast  like for instance I'm a big fan of  um some of the national parks up in the  Pacific Northwest because it's like  being transported to a different planet  Yosemite is obviously amazing but any  favorite spots  um where we won't go people won't go  looking for you there don't worry yeah  you live in Austin all the time so  that's right yeah yeah so I would say  uh Colorado Utah New Mexico spending  time in mountains around rivers lakes I  find  very therapeutic  and just gorgeous I I do think we suffer  from uh  awe deficiency disorder you know a bit  of add when we're  trapped in the mundane and for too long  with too much distraction with too many  to Do's with too many relationships  and there's no space for other  there isn't the room necessary all isn't  from my perspective generally a quick  hit that you get in the 30 seconds  between using two apps  there's there's more Breathing Room  required for genuine transcended  experience of awe so I try to on a  yearly basis  as one of my top priorities block out  these weeks of time in nature yeah last  year was the first year I did that I  went out to Colorado  um in August and just took daily hikes I  stayed in a hotel I'm not as beasty as  you do we need to water fast I was  eating every day but  um it was spectacular one thing I  noticed and I'd like to know your  process on  how do you handle going back into life  um great question you know because those  days were and are amazing right you know  like detached and you know maybe one  text message here or there in between  hikes or something and then you just  really clued in even the the process of  watching a show at night like one felt  so rich and like enough so I wasn't um  as aesthetic as you or and uh like  really cleaned all the Clutter but once  you return to life it's almost like  being a wash and demands and and I can  see from a place of more Equanimity how  one could make better choices but how do  you handle those transitions the  re-entry yeah so before getting to the  re-entry I think it might make sense for  me to talk about what comes before so  let's say it's like  pre during post  part of the reason I do these one week  or longer periods Off the Grid is  because it forces me to put better  systems in place  so there's the benefit that you derive  from say that week and I have three  weeks coming up right after this  interview where I'm going to be off the  grid  to set myself up for three weeks off the  grid I have a team I have the podcast I  have a lot of things that are in motion  at any given point in time  if you disappear for say a two to four  week period generally you cannot let the  whole house catch on fire then come back  and put it out effectively which means  you need to put some policies and rules  and so on in place in advance  and there's a carryover effect that has  a host of benefits and makes things  smoother for the re-entry so they're  related like the more you set up the pre  the easier the post is going to be and  then you have this beautiful expansive  experience in nature whatever it might  be whether you're making it a supper  Fest like I do or at a hotel at night  either way these things can work and  nature in and of itself is super helpful  I do think that a lot of the time we  like to imagine because we're driven  smart accomplished people that our  problems are very complex and at the end  of the day it's like you just need some  time in nature and a cold shower and  some [ __ ] macadamia nuts and you'll  be fine you don't need to solve like all  the existential dilemmas of humankind  actually or fancy Pharmaceuticals so  you have this experience over this week  and what I will do then is  set at least a  let's call it integration period of two  to three days where I will slowly Edge  back in  to my previous routine I will not within  12 hours of getting back to so-called  civilization have a day full of calls or  meetings I will not do that it's too  much of a shock to the system and I  think it robs you of a tail end of  benefits  which would also be the case with say  faster ketogenic diet or any number of  interventions you can squeeze out a long  tail of benefits if you make a handful  of changes for instance after an  extended fast what if you started with a  sub caloric ketogenic diet for a few  days you get to extend some of the  benefits as opposed to going straight  back to say a diet that includes a lot  of carbohydrates similarly when you  create more of a vacuum more space for  awe Insight reflection recovery  I think you're doing yourself a  disservice if you jump from park into  sixth gear and so I plan for that and  it's a function of scheduling  I also have a predictable weekly  schedule so I tend to schedule podcast  recordings on Mondays and Fridays in  preparation for an extended trip I will  batch a lot of similar activities that  we have say a bunch of episodes in the  bank that are pre-scheduled everything  is figured out in advance  and over time the more you take these  breaks the better your systems become  and the more liberated you are from the  day-to-day which means when you get back  you also don't need to rush as much into  hyperactivity and if you do you know  that that is more from a compulsivity  than from a necessity  while you're on these nature Retreats  are you writing on a daily basis are you  just thinking and allowing thoughts to  enter and leave your system  depends on the retreat so sometimes I'm  writing  but writing I think can underscore for  me a desire to be compulsively  productive  and I think that is inversely correlated  to my happiness or sense of well-being a  lot of the time  so there are many areas in my life now  so if you were to ask me what has  changed significantly since the time  that you wrote before our body I would  say that  rather than looking for areas to  optimize I am looking where I can very  deliberately de-optimize certain areas  to increase sense of well-being where  can I de-optimize where can I stop  measuring Where can I  stop reading books which areas  can I ignore completely what types of  information can I just excise from my  life all together for a period of time  delete Twitter  stop reading about books in X related to  say AI  or whatever it might be like where can I  de-optimize selectively to sort of  optimize the whole does that make sense  makes good sense yeah and before we  started recording I gave you a book  which is a short collection of poetry  by uh halaliza gafori which is called  gold this collection of roomy poetry  reading poetry is an activity almost by  definition which is  is the antithesis of optimization  so I've tried to also integrate more of  those activities into my life and this  relates to your question because there  are times when I will force myself to  sit on my goddamn hands and not write  not read just do the thing that is so  uncomfortable sometimes which is just  sitting there with yourself  you know it can be incredibly  uncomfortable I am in part because of  the fear that it could become  comfortable yeah right especially for  proactive people with a strong to use  Paul Conti's words generative drive you  know you're gonna  that's uh you know the which is a good  thing uh yeah I believe it's a good  thing and it it can be a good thing it  can indicate  really incredible  adaptations it can also sometimes I  think indicate maladaptations  right and so I think it's it's helpful  to take a break from that generative  drive or at least just  put it in park position  to see if that generative Drive is  is perhaps indicative of you leaning  towards something in a healthy proactive  way versus running from something in a  long-term destructive way yeah well and  I think Paul would say that part of the  generative Drive process is peace you  know not as necessarily even as a still  state but as a um you know being able to  experience peace even in the Transitions  and there's a lot more to say about that  and he would say it far better than I  ever would so I'll uh leave it at that  and um I mean for people who have the  option  getting in nature it doesn't have to be  all day every day on a water fast I just  take certain things to an extreme  because that's who I am but sorry when  you say water fast that means fasting  with water  right it's just that thing but yes  drinking water it just means you're  allowed to have water and nothing else  for for a long time I thought it meant  that you're not drinking water oh yeah  no don't do that some people do that  right they do these crazy food water  fasts um as a way I think they believe  it clears sent us in cells or something  but  um probably clears a lot more than just  sent us in cells yeah I uh there might  be something to it I mean look there are  people who recycle by drinking their own  urine not my jam uh but I would say it's  like three hours without shelter or  three days without water three weeks of  that food general rule of thumb so be  careful with dehydration you can go a  long time without food if you have I  don't care how ripped you are you get  eight percent body fat man you got  plenty of time you can go a couple weeks  no problem yeah you got calories 9 000  calories per pound store body fat you  got plenty don't worry uh  so for people who have the option to be  in nature and just exercise several  hours a day  to exhaustion  see how many of your problems seem to  just go away  let's try that yeah well my Sunday  routine is to try and get outside and  move as much as possible yeah I don't  always succeed but  um I'm going to try a longer retreat  into nature I think um  Olympic National Forest is is calling me  again it seems like once a year I just  want to get back up there it's uh it's  Colin you should get back out there it's  spectacular I have a question about  mentors I'm a big believer in mentors  either mentors that know us and we know  them or people that we assign as mentors  without them realizing it  um this sort of thing uh do you have  mentors at this stage of life  um for particular areas of life where  you you mentoring yourself are you  flying with a few voices in your head uh  that serve you well who are your mentors  I definitely have people I consider  mentors it's I think at this point  rarely one way in the sense that they  tend to be friends  I spend time with they get something  from it I get something from it not in a  transactional way but they find it fun  or beneficial or amusing  in some way redeeming to spend time with  me that's the hope but how is that  different from like traditional  friendship you know to sort of standard  friendship are you focus are you  spending time with some orientation  toward like their embodying areas of  life that you would like to emulate  totally I mean I spend I spend time  around people  I hope to be more like in some way  because guess what you're going to  average  into say the the just the some holistic  whole of the five or six people you  spend the most time with so you should  choose that very carefully that includes  virtual parasocial relationships okay if  you're listening to fill in the blank  person  for four hours a week five hours a week  two hours a week whoever that group  is comprised of is going to influence  who you become and  for me then I think carefully about my  friendships and they could be older like  Kevin Kelly has become a good friend  who has a wealth of life experience that  I don't have and so I might just call  him and say Kevin I have a question for  you but I do that with my younger  friends too and they could be younger  than I am and I might still view them as  a mentor in X Y or Z I think Mentor has  a  heavy weight to it it has a connotation  of  maybe never ending time-consuming  obligation so I I would never for  instance I know a lot of people try this  ask someone to be my mentor it's like  would you like to be my free life coach  forever you know I was like that's kind  of how it sounds to the recipient so it  sounds very formal yeah it sounds very  formal yeah it's so for me I would say  there have certainly been mentors I've  had wrestling coaches I've had teachers  I've had resident advisors who are  reverence who had a huge impact on my  life and followed up with me and paid  attention to me and cared for me in more  of a one directional  sense right I I view myself as the  beneficiary of course they they  certainly got something out of it if  they had that job and they probably  found it to be very gratifying in its  own way  and teachers like Professor Ed Shao at  Princeton I feel in incredibly indebted  to  these days  and for a long time I've believed that  you can learn something  powerful from almost anyone probably  anyone you interact with  could be an Uber driver could be someone  taking garbage out of a restaurant if  you really take the time to dig you can  find something and  before you can I think as an adult  effectively think about who you would  like to learn from if I put it that way  it's helpful to have a baseline of  self-awareness that you know what you  might want to work on to either amplify  strengths develop skills address  weaknesses and so for instance one of my  close friends Matt mullenweg is younger  than I am  he's the he's the founder of automatic  which runs wordpress.com he is the lead  developer of Wordpress although it was  an open source project of course with  many many contributors he was one of the  lead developers Now power something like  32 of the internet and he exemplifies a  cool and calm temperament even in the  most chaotic periods imaginable during  the most chaotic events imaginable and  when I find myself getting  dysregulated he's a fancy term losing my  [ __ ] or getting carried away by emotion  getting righteously angry or whatever it  might be and I recognize at some point  that it's really not serving me and that  I am being owned by the emotion right  like I'm the dog on the leash not the  other way around  then I think of that I'm like what would  Matt do  what advice would Matt give me right now  how would Matt act in these  circumstances and  I do that with with many friends I also  think a lot about and this is borrowing  from someone named Kathy Sierra  from a long time ago focusing more on  just-in-time information as opposed to  just in case information so just in case  information is like I'm going to read  these 20 books because in two years I  might be interested in  x y and z  that I think is often a waste of time  because if it ever becomes relevant  you're just gonna have to reread those  books  people do the same thing with humans  they're like I want to meet so and so  and have them as my mentor because maybe  five years from now I'll do X Y and Z  and then they'll be useful for ABC  that's too speculative and I think it  ends up in a lot of wasted energy so  the podcast for me  writing the books and doing the  interviews  even prior to the podcast becoming  involved with startups  delving into the world of science and  scientists  all helped me to  develop a confidence that  almost any question I could ask  I can find some semblance of an answer  for by just reaching out to a few people  and saying who do you know who might be  able to answer this  and that's very reassuring and it  relieves some of the anxiety or pressure  that people might feel to assemble some  personal board of directors of like  X-Men and women who can help them with  everything  and then there are people I hire to be  accountable to right so I might work  with coaches therapists  and so on who I would view as mentors  they just happen to get getting paid for  it right yeah the reason I asked the  question is because we were talking  about the meditative process going into  nature and even with psychedelics  there's you know they can be viewed a  lot of different ways but I think of  them largely as going inward to explore  I mean you're out in nature and learning  from nature  um there's such a court truth to Nature  I know that sounds a little bit you know  uh  wishy-washy but it's uh it's true like  if it's there it's concrete it's really  something uh it was there long before  any of us and it'll be there a lot  longer than any of us uh will ever be we  hope  um uh certainly if it goes we go  um but the process of learning from  others and paying attention to others is  really an outward looking thing I mean  we have to bring that in but I was just  curious how you balance those and as a  way to really understand not just your  time allocation right I think we could  talk about that you know what's how's  your morning structured Etc which I  think there's Great Value in in knowing  but more  um what what's your mind allocation  right I think about this you know like  where's my brain is it am I focused on  what's going on in here and you know is  that is there a need to excavate there  sure you know about how much time am I  out of my head and bringing things in  from the outside world and back and  forth so do you have some sense of  um across the year  across the day how you mind allocate I  don't know if um that's the best phrase  but I can't think of any better one if  you can think of a better one please  please uh table it because I'm happy to  use that how do I think about mind  allocation or attention allocation  I try to  and most frequently think of my mind  share  across a year  and across  week  a weekly time frame and  I find that to be manageable in the  sense that on a yearly basis  on New Year's Eve or roughly around New  Year's every year I'll do a past year  review pyr past year review where I'll  go back and I'll look at my entire last  year  a piece of paper in front of me lying  down the center  plus negative and I will go through  every week in my calendar for the  previous year and I will write down the  people places activities commitments Etc  that produced Peak positive emotional  experiences  so all right we're doing an 80 20  analysis here like what are the big  rocks that really move the needle in a  meaningful way and conversely who are  the people what are the things what are  the places that just made me go  and were draining produced Peak negative  experiences why the hell did I commit to  this type experiences  and that presents me with a do more of  do less of list then I look forward to  the next year and I did this  I suppose just a handful of months ago  around New Year's  with the Positive I'm like okay here's  my list of do more of it's not real  until it's in the calendar let's get  these things in the calendar and then I  will start talking to people booking  things  having people help with organizing if  that is required and getting things  blocked out so I have already  this year and we're in the reasonable  beginning stages of the year I have  things blocked out until November of  this year  and those provide the breaks in the  action  not just the breaks in the action but  the fun stuff because by the way guys  I thought for a long time like yeah I  take care of a b and c and the good  stuff just takes care of itself I've  I do not any longer believe that to be  true unless you schedule these things  that you claim are important they're  gonna get crowded out by [ __ ]  and maybe not [ __ ] but just less  important things  they're urgent will crush the important  so I get these things on the calendar  and then I back up and I look at optimal  weekly  mind allocation right attentional  allocation  and there's a there's there's an  Incredible cost to cognitive switching  if you're just task switching all day so  I will try my best to format a weekly  Rhythm a weekly sequence that allows me  to focus on certain types of tasks  so Mondays very frequently admin of some  type just bits and ends flots and Jetsam  all the miscellaneous pieces that are  part of life you got to deal with them  yeah that tends to be Monday  whenever possible and especially if I'm  focused on physical activity let's just  say I'm in a place like Colorado I will  try to schedule most of that for after  lunch  to ensure that I get in a lot of  exercise and movement in the first  portion of the day not everybody has  that ability but I will say more of you  have that capacity than you might think  because most of what we all do is just  not important  time on social media first thing in the  morning is probably the most poisonous  activity that I could take part in I I  don't want to you know point fingers at  anyone else but oh yeah I think if  people ask you know what what is the you  know amount of time it takes to get in a  really good workout  it's going to be about an hour you know  but a lot can be done in 45 if we're  even 30 minutes let me think about how  quickly that time goes by yeah I'm sure  I'm not the only one uh that is part of  the reason I deleted a lot of these apps  from my phone it's like I would be I'd  go into the bathroom to take a you know  quick bit of business and then 45  minutes later I'm like how have I been  looking at Instagram for 45 minutes yeah  lines in for restrooms have gotten very  long in the last 10 10 years has anyone  noticed that the weight for the  restrooms has gotten yeah so yeah you  have time for the important stuff I  think and just look at some of the  extreme overachievers out there they  have the same amount of time that you do  have you I was going to ask this later  I'll just we'll just quickly interject  this now  um have I saw perhaps it was on Twitter  maybe I overheard this that you're back  on Instagram it's uh I mean you've  always had an account yeah that posts  but are you back in there are you out of  there  um I mean like my the Dirty Little  Secret I'm single again and that's a  great way to connect with with eligible  ladies who might be of interest  so you're on um so you're on Instagram  I'm willing to pay the tax of dealing  with the brain damage of using Instagram  as a result hey look finding a great  life partner is exactly it's great  exactly so that's that is the reason for  that but  otherwise it would not be on my phone  it's too it wouldn't even be on your  phone absolutely not it's too well  designed these companies are very smart  they have very good data scientists they  have very good UI specialists  if anyone out there thinks that they can  like maybe maybe Jocko can can  discipline his way through it I'm sure  he can because he's he is Jocko but in  my case in the case of most people like  you're bringing a knife to a gunfight if  you think you can use your self-control  to keep your use of Instagram to say 10  minutes at a club good luck yeah and  even if you can  people say ah but I do that anyway I'm  like all right how much time do you  spend sending memes and links from  Instagram or fill in the blank platform  to your friends and group chat how much  time is that consume I spend a fair  amount of time on Instagram and Twitter  posting things related to the podcast  but  um I don't have someone to do that for  me and I I actually enjoy doing it and  it challenges me in certain ways but I  completely agree with everything you're  saying I also want to note that you  didn't say that you're on Twitter uh  possibly to meet somebody  um which is more a statement about  Twitter yeah yeah it's not that it's not  the not the friendliest neighborhood  I've found and uh I would say Twitter  has its use cases I I find it useful in  some respects it has become much less  useful and much less practical in the  last year with a lot of the product  changes but  it has its place it's not on my phone it  was on my phone for a very brief period  of time  I do not want  I find that my ability to be still in  calm  is eroded  if I am  too easily able to escape boredom  if you cease to have the ability to be  bored for five to ten minutes I think  that makes you very fragile and makes  you very easy to manipulate also  and there are a lot of forces at play  online that want to manipulate or shape  your behavior in different ways so I  feel like it is imperative for me to  cultivate the ability to just sit still  and not consume the five minutes in line  waiting to get into a restaurant by  hopping on Twitter or Instagram  so that's part of the reason they're not  on my phone could you tell us about [ __ ]  punch  yeah I can tell you about [ __ ] punch so  [ __ ] punch  is a creative project  intended once again to make me less  precious about protecting whatever brand  I think I might have  and this is an investment in my  long-term mental health also and I think  in my career flexibility my willingness  to experiment  [ __ ] punch could be a long story but the  gist of it is I wanted to experiment  with fiction writing I've been saying  this for years and I've never done it  that's the backdrop  on top of that I have wanted to get back  into illustration and work in the visual  arts which I did for a long time when I  was younger  and I've not done that consistently  why not because I haven't had  accountability I haven't had deadlines  it hasn't been in the calendar this  should sound somewhat familiar by now  and at the same time I was becoming very  interested in web3 and what was  happening in the world of nfts this is  probably 2020 and I know they've  developed a fairly negative connotation  for a lot of good reasons  but I started to think about fundraising  for early stage science and if I could  do  if I could conduct an experiment  as a proof of concept with different  novel approaches to fundraising so  rather than just calling the rich  friends who might sort of Bend to the  pressure  or be willing to fund I wanted to look  at say crowdfunding back in the day then  I wanted to look at different options  for perhaps art auctions and I was going  to do this with with Contemporary Art  this is many years ago and in the  process of wanting to fund the the  Hopkins Center focused on psychedelic  and Consciousness research which which  the was the first of its kind in the  United States  and the technology gave me the  opportunity  to learn about a new  let's just call it set of Technologies  so to develop skills and knowledge it  would give me the opportunity to  reconnect and deepen friendships with a  number of my very very smart friends who  are playing in that area  also test fundraising also get back into  fiction and art and all that combined  into this thing that I ended up calling  [ __ ] punch because it made me laugh and  you know what  man if you take your work too seriously  you're gonna burn out before you get the  really serious work done and I think it  was uh Bertrand Russell has said it's a  sure sign of an impending nervous  breakdown if you start taking your work  too seriously or believing your work to  be very very serious  and  for that reason  I wanted to give it an absurd name that  would also have some Word of Mouth  benefit  and that to  see what would happen honestly just see  what happened because I was like all  right look  what is honestly the worst thing that  happens like people write a bunch of  pieces where they're like shaking their  fist at the sky how dare to empharis  create a project you could turn it  around on them and just say that what  they were doing is a [ __ ] punch  attempting well that was kind of the  thing uh that was kind of part of the  thinking that it would just be  entertaining to watch people seriously  trying to critique something called [ __ ]  punch and uh the upshot of that is it  raised almost two million dollars sold  out in something like 30 minutes or 40  minutes for the foundation all that  money went to Science Foundation all  that money has already been distributed  in the form of Grants wonderful and uh  along the way I got to work with artists  with programmers learn new technologies  reconnect with old friends and now we're  back in touch and it's it's extremely  fun to be back in touch with these folks  and I've written  the equivalent of a short book in  fiction in the form of short stories  that are this Fantasy World building  exercise for me and I'm having a blast  so I'm exercising new creative muscles  that has led me back into the worlds of  comic books which I haven't created yet  led me back into the worlds of gaming  led me back into my fascination of  tabletop gaming because I played DND  forever when I was a kid that was my  refuge as a runt who got the crap kicked  out of them left and right  and I'm having just a blast and the  the takeaway I think on some level is  that you should do things  should as [ __ ] is a is a is a loaded  term  it's helpful for me to consider doing  things that give me energy right because  if we say all right time management is  fine  but  time doesn't really have any practical  value unless you have attention right so  then there's attentional management but  that attention is limited also  physically and sort of metaphorically by  energy right so you have like substrates  diets neurotransmitters and so on if you  do not have the the basic batteries  required  the rest of the things that are higher  up on Nap pyramid  can't really be executed properly so for  me it's like okay let's say [ __ ] punch  doesn't do anything it's total failure  right coming back to like we're already  raised two million dollars for science  it didn't that science could be break  through science so good it could so  punch sorry yeah sorry so [ __ ] punch is  at least thus far a success it is but  coming back to Seth goodin's question I  asked myself would I do this even if it  turns out to be a complete failure  financially and I was like yes because I  think the relationships and the skills  even if this quote unquote fails from  the outside looking in those will  transcend this project and be  life-affirming and helpful and fun in  other areas and that's proven to be true  even though the project is ongoing  and  I have more energy now because of this  ridiculous project I'm very proud of the  fiction actually this ridiculous project  called [ __ ] punch people can find the  legend of cockpunch on uh any fine  provider of podcasts and hired voice  actors did the scripting the production  I hit number one fiction worldwide on  Apple podcast for a while the whole  thing's hilarious and um and if you  could can you explain a little bit about  the characters in [ __ ] punch yeah who's  who's punching who's [ __ ] yeah yeah or  which [ __ ] are punching yeah which  [ __ ] are punching which how does this  work so  here we go all right so the legend of  [ __ ] punch  takes place in this realm called varlata  and verlata is being described through  the narrator  who we know as the seventh scribe we  don't know much about the seventh scribe  but sevenscribe makes an appearance in  episode one as the reliable but possibly  sometimes unreliable narrator of this  space and there's a there's a  mind-bending Time component where  there's something called restarts  something like the edge of tomorrow if  people have ever seen this movie where  time restarts maybe like Groundhog Day  time restarts and it's unclear as of yet  in the story why that is the case but  people basically snap into being they  know who they are and what they do but  they have no real memories to speak of  so the world is constantly being  reconstructed and pieced together by  these scribes the seventh of which is  the narrator so you can you you might  read into this that I am a fan of  fantasy Tolkien you name it Ursula Kate  Le Guin uh the wizard of earthy Etc  then there are eight primary  houses these are the greater houses some  might call them Clans and they have  different characteristics  just prior to this seven scribe  beginning his piecing together which  turns into the story in the podcast  there was a Warring States period this  much he's been able to establish  and the peacekeeping mechanism that was  devised is something called the great  games and the great games is a combat  competition  and  the eight greater houses send their best  fighters who've been vetted through  preliminary competitions to the great  games which is in the free trade zone  which is this one place where all of the  races mingle and trade and so on  and all these characters happen to be  anthropomorphized roosters so  they have uh generally each one Gauntlet  of some type and clearly they punch each  other with this Gauntlet and there are  many other types of weapons so the  colloquial nickname for this Olympics of  combat  is [ __ ] punch and that is the that is  the etymology  so the scholars say of [ __ ] Punch The  Legend Of [ __ ] punch and there's a lot  more to it and there are many wrinkles a  lot of Easter eggs in this entire story  the idea came to me and it started off  as a bit of a farce right it was just  going to be something funny  see if it works maybe it raises some  money very light lift  but once I got into the fiction I  started digging it super seriously so  it's become very very elaborate it's  become really really elaborate and I'm  loving it it's great so who knows where  it'll go I have no idea that's part of  the reason why I called it an emergent  long fiction project I didn't call it an  nft project I was like this is an  emergent long fiction project where I'm  taking inputs from the audience I'm I'm  watching very closely what people  understand or don't understand or find  interesting I'm looking at for instance  what is generated when I host an an AI  assisted art competition which I did  with the fans  and a lot of these bits and pieces get  integrated in some fashion into this  thing that chapter by chapter is  coalescing so that's Scott bunch  amazing and I had to buy cockpunch.com  and the ad [ __ ] punch Twitter  you had to buy it from somebody oh yeah  oh yeah oh yeah the whole process I  don't want to ask what it was being used  for prior to your purchase it was not  being used for uh Fantasy World building  I'll put it that way got it  amazing and for so many reasons I have  so much to say but first of all your  excitement about it is tangible yeah the  energy you have around it is infectious  um  and  well I don't want to go into the total  um depth and Contour of uh what Paul  Conte has been telling me over the last  week of preparing this mental health  series about what's really great in life  that we all should cultivate it has a  lot to do with this generative Drive  which has a lot to do with positive  energy not just positive thinking but  positive energy but this  um this Triad of Peace contentment and  delight and as you were explaining it  it's clear that it brings you great  peace contentment and Delight as action  terms not like sit there and just hover  in the Basking in it it's just so clear  that this is a great idea  um and I love that you started it as a  way to kind of um  uh I don't know like knock the fear out  of yourself a little bit by knocking a  little fear into the whole thing yeah  like like what would happen if you let  your mind go and and allowed yourself  yeah to explore this and and what  permission would it buy you if it's not  a total disaster this is true for the  for our body too I'm like what if this  partially works it's not even a home run  but let's say I get on base what  permission does this then buy me what  other Impossibles and quotation marks am  I willing to challenge  and I was able to make the Hop from one  category in the bookstore to a  completely different category and then  this guy's limit I was like I can do  anything I can do whatever I want I've  given myself permission and the market  has given me permission but the most  important  first step is you giving yourself  permission and with say [ __ ] punch as  ludicrous as it is  now that I've done that my career hasn't  ended hasn't had any negative impact on  my career whatsoever I'm like  okay that's actually kind of surprising  to the contrary it seems like it gives  you energy it raised money for science  is it still raising money it's it's not  is there still an opportunity for people  to No it's it's sold out uh if people  want to contribute to say the early  stage science  and let's just say specifically  psychedelics I would say it's very very  hard to get  a very solid understanding of  the field and the shifting Sands and the  projects and so on it's it's very  rapidly changing so I would say just  provide  money to a foundation that's already  doing good work it could be a river  sticks Foundation it could be Beckley  Foundation my Foundation scissor  Foundation I think does pretty good work  and scissor is not just the the  journalism fellowships there are also  this uh it's funding for psychedelics oh  yes there's tons of stuff there's a  project page on  scissorfoundation.org you can see the  projects they're probably 15 to 20 of  them and they can see the basic science  all the way from really basic science  looking at possible mechanisms of action  for something like dipt which is a very  strange compound that the ipt yeah most  people aren't going to know it that that  produces  profound auditory distortions and  hallucinations in humans very hard to  animal model  and  from that all the way up to really  sophisticated Imaging studies from that  to say at least a year or two ago  supporting phase three trials for MDMA  assisted Psychotherapy then the  journalism then the this then that but a  lot of a lot of different uh scientific  studies that are that are being  supported so that's that's very exciting  to me and but the the [ __ ] punch side of  things is all done Money's been  distributed uh and maybe I'll do more of  this kind of thing but I might take a  different approach I I feel like okay I  learned what I feel  I wanted to learn from that and maybe  I'll try something new next time  one thing's clear nobody tells you what  to do  um except you and but that's vetted  through many important filters like  structured filters and um very  thoughtful filters or the words that  come to mind when I think about your  process as you're sharing one more thing  which is  one of the sources of Joy Of [ __ ] punch  is that it is not over planned I set  some initial conditions and now it's  emergent  and as someone who has hyper analyzed  and meticulously planned most of my life  for decades  I think it's helpful to have an improv  component  so if you are a hyper planner  if you're a hyper measurer if you like  that degree of control maybe you should  try something that's a little less  controlled take an improv class try  fiction writing do something that isn't  totally scripted where you don't know  the outcome I think it's really good  medicine for people just like if you  spend all your time in a yoga class  maybe you should spend one day a week  lifting weights see what that's like and  if you spend all your time in the gym  and you can barely touch your toes maybe  you should do some more downward dog try  some yoga similar I think the spectrum  of hyper planned to completely  free-flowing and Improv  provides ample opportunity to  enrich themselves and maybe address some  weaknesses at the same time so for me  [ __ ] punch has been incredibly  therapeutic probably the first time that  anyone's ever uttered that sentence but  yes probably yeah but that's part of  what makes it so cool yeah totally I  love it  I'm wondering if you'd be willing to  share with us a little bit about  your mindset  um maybe even your motivation but  um certainly your mindset around sharing  some of the hard  personal tribulations that you shared uh  in preparation for this discussion today  I went back to some of those posts that  you did and the  um podcasts that you did around this and  I'd listen to them at the time and  um you know they deal with quite serious  violations of childhood and of self and  um they're hard I mean they're they're  hard to listen to and I can only imagine  they must be even  far far harder to experience and I was  curious what led to your willingness to  do that  and um  yeah I mean I have my own ideas about  what might have motivated it but I'd  like to hear it from you sure happy to  talk about it uh and I think there are  two particular examples that come to  mind  so one is my  near suicide in college and  uh if people search  some practical thoughts on suicide and  my name it'll pop right up I mean if you  just search  my name and suicide it'll probably pop  right up  pretty well indexed at this point which  is very deliberate  people can look at the URL structure for  a little wink and uh hat tip uh I'll  tell you something about optimizing for  Google if you look at it I'll just tell  you the URL is spells out how to commit  suicide but clearly I'm not teaching  people how to commit suicide but I  wanted  that to be a Honeypot for some of that  traffic because it's a lot easier now to  find that type of practical  implementation advice  and it's a bit harder to find I think  compelling intervention  so first of all if you're feeling  suicide obviously call Suicide Hotline  please right that's sometimes the last  thing that people want to hear when they  are in a place of suicidal ideation  and the reason I ended up writing a long  post about this which was terrifying to  write because I had never  told my parents I'd never told my  closest friends this was a secret this  is a dark dark secret  and  I wrote about it because  I went to an event  in San Francisco I was interviewed on  stage by Jason calcanus who's a friend  and a very good interviewer  at an event and after I got off stage  a bunch of people approached me and I  was saying hi and taking photos and  signing things and so on  and there was one young man there very  well dressed  which isn't really relevant I just it  was striking because in San Francisco  sometimes people are very underdressed  and he was he had dressed up for it like  he'd taken it seriously and he was in a  suit and tie and he asked me if I could  sign a book for his brother  and  I said sure no problem and I asked him  what would you like me to write to your  brother and he kind of blanked he didn't  kind of blank he totally blanked but the  look behind his eyes was  unusual it wasn't just I don't know what  to say blank there was something else  behind it and I could tell that he felt  under pressure  and I said no problem take your time  I'll tell you what I'll just chat with a  couple of other people and I'll sign the  book no problem I'm not going anywhere  and chatted with the other folks and  then  he asked if he could just walk me to the  elevator and then I could sign the book  I was like sure  and he explained to me  as I walked to the elevator how his  brother had been a huge fan of mine  and that  I'd really kept his brother afloat for a  long time and eventually his brother  killed himself  and that they'd kept his room exactly  how it was  and he wanted me to sign the book so  that he could put the book in his  brother's room  and  he asked me if I'd ever considered  talking about mental health and mental  health challenges publicly because he  thought it would really help a lot of  people  and that just  I mean I'm like feeling myself tear up  right now I mean it it was so crushing  to hear the story  and totally unbeknownst to him I had a  lot of history  with depressive episodes and when I say  near suicide I had it on the calendar I  had a plan I was going to kill myself I  knew exactly how I was going to do it I  knew where I was going to do it I knew  all of the variables that I needed to  account for to get it done and  the only reason that didn't happen for  people who don't have the contacts which  most people want  is I had tried to reserve a book at  Firestone Library this is at Princeton  which had something to do with suicide  it was like assisted suicide like the  clinician's guide to euthanasia  something like that  and it wasn't in  and I had forgotten to change my address  of the registrar's office I was taking a  year away from school  and that was to focus on finishing my  thesis it was to try a few jobs but I  had ended up in a very bad place  and was feeling very isolated and my  friends were graduating a year ahead of  me and I was stuck on this thesis and  there's a lot of backstory that I won't  bore people with but  got to the point where I decided  not that objectively objectively my life  is bad I think this is where people who  haven't experienced depression get a  little confused or it's hard for them to  identify when they give advice to a  depressed person  because you might say to a depressed  person like but look your life is so  great like there's this there's that  there's this and for a lot of depressed  people to say yeah I know  I look at that and I can't fix my state  because I am broken and if this is how  I'm going to have to live forever  with being this broken and dysfunctional  and to have this internal hell that I  live day by day  I just want to escape it's like someone  jumping out of a burning building it's  like they don't want to kill themselves  but they're jumping out of a burning  building  and  so I had it on the calendar  and thank God this was back when they  would still send you a physical reminder  in the mail a little postcard that says  your book is in and that card went to my  parents house and my mom saw it and  panicked and called me  and I lied I said it was for a friend  who went to Rutgers who was doing a  project on abnc but it's it was just  enough to kind of snap me out of the  trance and realize that  killing yourself is like putting on a  suicide vest with explosives and walking  to a room of all the people you care the  most about and and blowing yourself up  so that snapped me out of it but no one  knew this this guy certainly didn't know  that  and that is when I went home and thought  about it and just decided  okay  there's a chance if I write this it's  not certain but there's a chance this  might help someone it might prevent  someone from doing what I was almost  about to do  and so I spent  months getting this post written and put  it out and I and I know for a fact it  has saved minimum dozens of Lies and  there are other things including a very  extensive list of resources  and uh so that's  gave me  I suppose not a toe in the water but  sort of jumping feet first into the deep  end  an experience of being that vulnerable  and this was a long time ago I mean this  is  I want to say at least eight to ten  years ago when I put that post out and  uh  then uh  I want to say it was just before covid  lockdown  I was in Costa Rica visiting a friend  I was with my girlfriend at the time and  she knew a secret of mine and she was  one of maybe two or three people who  knew  that I'd been sexually abused when I was  a kid by a babysitter's son from two to  four roughly  and  routinely  all the time kind of thing and  like what you're envisioning is is is is  is is what happened so it was not good  and that had been compartmentalized and  locked away for my whole life  I was like that's in the past  we're focused on moving forward  and nothing to be fixed nothing to fix  and that was my my perspective on things  uh  it turned out it wasn't quite that  simple right and  so I had done a lot of work a lot of  therapy used psychedelic therapies as  well  which once again are not all upside  potential there are some significant  risks  but I had come a long way and my plan  had always been to wait until my parents  passed because I didn't want them to  blame themselves for this  and then to write a book and  there was something though at the time  when I was having dinner with my  girlfriend  there was dissatisfying about that plan  if there's something about it that  bothered me and I couldn't quite put a  finger on it and I was talking to her  about it  and she said that's going to take a long  time  she's like have you ever thought about  how many people  are going to  pass away or die  or suffer between now and when you  publish that book  and uh  I thought about it and it was at that  dinner that I decided to at least record  a podcast  covering this terrain I was not at all  convinced that I wanted to publish it I  I was terrified of publishing it also  because it meant opening myself up to a  lot of conversations  or maybe just  uh  hurtful commentary online who knows like  people are there are a lot of idiots out  there and a lot of otherwise fine people  who are idiots on the internet  so it's very hesitant ultimately decided  I I didn't want to do it as a one-man  show I didn't want to make it a  monologue so I asked my friend Debbie  Millman  who had been on my podcast she's an  amazing graphic designer and teacher  but she had unexpectedly on my podcast  based on some of my questions  for the first time publicly told her  story about being sexually abused  and so I had leaned on her in years  after that in private  and I asked her if she would be willing  to have a conversation with me about our  respective Journeys and  what it felt like what it looked like  what helped what didn't help what worked  what didn't to provide at the very least  a glimmer of hope for people who  were keeping some of these dark secrets  or contending with them not knowing what  to do with them and we had that  conversation and I sat on it I sat on it  I sat on it and then I put it out and  decided in advance that I would not look  at any social media for at least several  weeks afterwards  if my team saw anything on social media  got emails I didn't want to see anything  other than positive feedback which is  not my de facto I'm usually  eager to solicit constructive feedback  but in this case I I knew that my own  position was too vulnerable I I didn't  want to  open up the possibility of of  destabilizing myself  and I put it out and  I think it's the most important podcast  I've ever put up so I kind of felt like  my job was done from a podcasting  perspective  after that  and  it's been incredibly gratifying I think  it has certainly helped a fair number of  people and it was also really hard  because what I didn't anticipate was I  would say of my  really super high performing close male  friends  maybe half  reached out to me to tell someone for  the first time about their extremely  awful graphic first-hand experience of  being sexually abused the percentages  were mind-blowing like the the actual  percentages were super super high which  is part of the reason I mentioned  earlier I think it's good to spend a  little bit of time in those empty spaces  to see you know am I  in a positive energetic sense pursuing  something good or am I running away from  demons whipping my back  and  for a lot of those guys I'm sure it's  true for a lot of women too like they  they find medication  through intense focus and achievement  which is super adaptive in a lot of ways  but it doesn't always have  lifetime reliability and  [Music]  that's the story  um it's impossible to hear those stories  your story without feeling some  substantial emotion I'm not trying to  intellectualize it's  um  both both of those aspects of your  history that you shared are huge they  really are they're obviously huge for  you and and they're huge in terms of the  positive impact in the world I I know  this because  um I have read the comments right and I  and I've talked to people who have  listen to those podcasts and read those  blogs and um and have similar or maybe  different stories of trauma but I think  as with your work in the Psychedelic  space as with your work in  um the physical augmentation space  whatever you want to call it  um  it's apparent that you're willing to be  first man in on a lot of things and  really you're sitting alone there in  those moments and uh these categories of  revealing trauma are in my mind anyway  so much more substantial in terms of  their impact positive impact and the  other  aspects for our body and psychedelic  work etc is also tremendously impactful  so that's saying a lot so so I say thank  you for for your bravery and um thanks  Andrew yeah it's um  it's crazy because I think that a lot of  people  um  can imagine telling a story or to a  close friend or something but you know  to put it out into the world you know  it's like it's huge like you don't know  how that's gonna Ripple  um and you've been a real Pioneer an  example for uh for me for for lacks for  other people and revealing things not  like that um but different and Peter  Attias recently been opening up about  some serious challenges that he's had in  his and his book he does that on podcast  he's been doing it so  um you know yet another category  um arguably the most important category  for  um exploration and sharing and you know  thoughtful bravery right because you  didn't just put it out there in any form  so uh one thing I do know by experience  is there's nothing weirder than being uh  told thank you for the painful thing  that you did so I don't want to push  that too far but I'd be remiss if I  didn't because it really has its impact  and for doing it again here today  because  um so yeah that huge thanks for doing  that yeah my my pleasure and I'll also  say you know I got advice from  very very experienced uh psychedelic  facilitator at one point who said  take the pain and make it part of your  medicine  and  the way I think that applies here  is  we all experience pain we all experience  suffering  many of us have experienced trauma of  one type or another  and  that can consume you I mean it can  consume you but it's like fire right it  can consume you but you can also harness  it and use it for different things  and  I know for I think it's I'm not going to  hedge I'll say I know for a fact that  there are people I've spoken to  who are suicidal and by the way I'm not  inviting everyone who's listening if you  are suicidal to reach out to because it  won't work I've had to disengage from  that because it gets too heavy right  just to engage one-on-one with people  who are suicidal but there are resources  in that post I mentioned the Practical  thoughts on suicide  but let's just talk about closer friends  people you would never suspect in a  million years who are this close to  blowing their friends out  people folks would recognize in some  cases  the fact that I was also there once is  why they listen to me  because I have unfortunately I'm a  subject matter expert man I have  credibility  and that actually is very redeeming  it provides some meaning to the  suffering that I experienced it's like  okay  here I am  for whatever host of reasons I am put in  this place and time with this person  and they don't trust the input of these  other people they're talking to because  those people don't know what it's like  but I can look at this person in the eye  and be like oh I know  and that's just a different thing so you  can  you can find a way to transmute that  pain  into  something meaningful into a gift that  hopefully you can share in some way  not necessarily with the whole wide  world just one person that's a big deal  one person's a big deal  there's a lot out there that is intended  for Mass consumption that gets in front  of millions of people doesn't really  impact a single person very much  so even if you don't have a podcast you  don't have books if you have the ability  to sit down with one person and really  make an impact that's actually more  meaningful than most of the crap that  gets put out there  so take heart  Amen to that  I'd like to spend a little bit of time  talking about the roles you see yourself  in you know I I had this list coming in  here of okay you've done the exploration  of the health sphere you  um self-experimentation you  you're uh you've been an investor you  are an investor you're a podcaster  you're you know I think these are more  than titles I think  titles are great but titles are what we  get from other people telling us what we  do or deciding what we do  um  I'm more interested in how you think  about yourself like your your own role  identity and you know I have to assume  you've spent a little bit of time on  this like if one were to go through the  the checklist of possible roles yeah  right okay I confess I do this I think  like okay like I I think I call I think  I checked the box of animal because  we're we're animals after all or you  know humans don't pole dancing I think  I'd use a pole dancer absolutely not  um are you still Tango dancing  I'm planning on getting back into it  great and that is that does have some  background I have Argentine lineage and  I'm embarrassed to say I don't tank uh  no Tango but you got the man you got the  mate in the in the Green Room my uh  grandparents uh Tango into their 80s I  think late 80s yeah it is yeah eight  steak and smoke cigarettes and uh lived  until their 90s exactly  um  but I'm curious about the roles that you  see yourself in like you know um roll  identity to me is so important  um in terms of where we see ourselves  now and where we see ourselves going  forward and who knows maybe you don't  have any role identity plan but you know  what are some boxes that you see  yourself in now that you really strongly  identify with and then what are some  boxes that um you'd like to check off  going forward  so current  boxes  I would say the two that I probably  identify with most  maybe three  but I'll focus on two experimentalists  which can take a lot of forms right that  can that can apply to a whole lot of  different spheres  so experimentalist  and then teacher  and for the longest time  long long time I thought eventually I  would go back and actually be a ninth  grade teacher because I feel like that  is such a critical window for so many  kids where they can  either  hit an inflection point and go in a  really good direction or they can go in  a really bad Direction and I certainly  saw that online Long Island with a lot  of my friends a lot of overdoses a bunch  of friends who've died of  opiate addiction and various things and  I had some intervention with mentors  early on that  that sort of flipped the switch on the  railroad track and sent me in a  different direction so I thought for a  long time I would go back  and be a ninth grade teacher and my  impulse to experiment leads to  enthusiasm for teaching  if that makes any sense because I feel  like  as good as I might be or decent at  taking a complex subject  deconstructing it applying 80 20.  putting things in order and learning  things very quickly  which includes  stress testing assumptions in that  sort of assumed progression for skill  like language learning there's so many  myths in language learning as an example  if it takes me say six months to become  reasonably competent in field X I can  usually get other people to that same  point of confidence in a third of that  time  so for me it's very gratifying to teach  and I view all the books as teaching  tools I'm no tool story I recognize I'm  not the world's greatest writer I take  the writing seriously  I don't have asset I do many many  revisions even for talk much it's like  27 revisions for a short story called  [ __ ]  so I take it seriously but I recognize  that I'm not the world's greatest  Wordsmith but I am looking for outcomes  in readers or listeners and I view my  job as that of teacher so I'd say  experimentalist and teacher of the two  and  those both go a long way  and  applies to  say dog training you know lots of ran  lots of experiments and for those  listening to him just looked under the  table one thing I should have said at  the beginning and I did not is that um  this is the first human Lab podcast to  feature a guest who brought their dog so  we have Molly is here as well and we're  absolutely delighted there has not been  a dog at on the huberman Lab podcast  since uh Costello passed away and uh I'm  you know practically floating in in  Delight that Molly's here today she's  amazing and you've done an amazing job  training her too so thank you yeah she's  she's laying right next to my feet  licking my hand as I speak so good and  I'd say if I were to expand that by one  I would probably say explore but the  exploring goes hand in hand with the  experimentation  uh so  that could be Geographic exploration it  could be spending time with people who  are excellent at anything  in any field  and seeing where that gingerbread Trail  leads me  and I think the the exploration and the  experimentation are for me  bedfellows they go together  what about roles that you would like to  explore or potentially see yourself in I  mean I don't have a magic wand but if I  did as a fellow podcaster and I consider  you a friend uh I would say okay like if  I could wand you to the success and  given role that wouldn't be the way it  would work and that wouldn't be as  gratifying as having to figure it all  out because that's part of your your  Machinery uh as you just told us so yeah  what are some role life roles that  you're interested in expanding and or  stepping into that you haven't explored  I'd say more more artists more Artistry  especially in the visual sense because I  wanted to be a comic book penciler for a  really long time got paid as an  illustrator towards the end of high  school and during college so Illustrated  books and magazines and so on then I  just dropped it I dropped it when I  graduated because I was kid stuff and it  was time to get serious and be an adult  and I just cold turkey to stop all of it  and so the skills of atrophied a lot but  there's still there's still a bit in  there I've seen some posts on Instagram  that were yeah quite good so I'm still  messing around yeah I'm still messing  around and especially when I have some  structure I do well so I'd like to  pursue that I would like to experiment  with  animation  so I don't know if animator would be the  right label because I most likely would  not be doing the animation myself but  playing a role in visual art would be  one father would be another one  eventually  and try not to be attached to it but  we all play games of various types and  if we get really good at certain games  that are socially rewarded then you make  money doing  a podcast or investing or whatever it  might be  but when my  when when when the sort of ramp of my  learning starts to flatten out a bit I  tend to get bored of those games and I  think that  certainly one of the biggest adventures  must be Parenthood  so at some point  I think  father  would be on there  and I should say this is very judgmental  to me to say but I think there's a big  difference between wanting to  wanting to be a parent and wanting to  have kids I'm very cautious about saying  I want to have kids because it doesn't  automatically imply you want to be a  good parent  which is also why I thought it was very  important for me to spend a lot of time  training Molly  and a lot of learning there right yeah  she's like all right am I going to do  the heavy lifting and the hard work  recognizing that kids are not deferred  dogs but I do think they're actually a  lot of similarities uh in terms of  just predictive ability if you see  someone who has dogs that are terribly  trained  look at their kids you might see some  similarities my good friend  um my good friend I'll owed him here  who's a mdp issu is their chair of  Ophthalmology at Stanford Jeff Goldberg  I once asked him if he has any pets and  he said that he and his wife had three  children as preparation for having a dog  that's hilarious there's a quote also  from a book called Don't Shoot the dog  which is terrible title but excellent  book written by Karen Pryor who was a an  aquatic mammal trainer so she's training  dolphins and whales and so on which  don't respond to negative reinforcement  you can't really hit them with a rolled  up newspaper if they don't do what you  want and there's a quote in that book  which is something along the lines of I  can't remember the attribution it's  another trainer and it was people should  not be allowed to have children until  they've successfully trained a chicken  [Laughter]  because also chickens like they they  just don't have the brain power to  respond to uh much negative  reinforcement so you have to coax them  to do what you want them to do with  positive reinforcement and I mean  operate in classical conditioning it's  kind of same same across the board  whether you're like a CIA trying to  train cockroaches to flip lights which  is not making that one up by the way or  training wheel or training a cat or  training a human uh training sounds bad  cultivating  a wonderful human yeah then I think  there's a lot to be learned across the  board so I've successfully proven to  myself that I can keep a dog alive and  happy yeah and train up another happy  nervous system yeah you know curate  another nervous system and that's a big  deal oh yeah well she's also like my  external nervous system so we we sort of  work in tandem I pay a lot of attention  to how she relates to different people  yeah I saw earlier today I mean as  someone who is the owner of a Bulldog  Mastiff who knew one command which was  weight which is which is that by default  the easiest thing to train a bulldog  because it when when you by the way  folks if you stop a bulldog on the  street to scratch them and they look  delighted they might like you but  chances are they're just really relieved  that they get to stop  so and  um Costello he had a forebrain and he  was smart about what he needed to be  smart about but Molly is exceptional  like she knows where she needs to be and  she's super connected to you and she  knows a ton of commands it was  ridiculous our staff was like delighting  in the number of things that Tim could  get her to do just by looking at her  yeah yeah yeah she's uh she's also quite  calm out of the box  uh which helps although it makes it  harder in some respects to train because  she doesn't have much food drive if you  like those Maui new Easter eggs yeah she  loves the Maui News venison sticks but  she  well okay I'll get I'll give I'll say  two things so first is if your dog is a  spaz about food that's actually great  news it will make your dog very easy to  train in some respects  uh re-don't shoot the dog it's it's  excellent  and there's some others I could  recommend I had a woman named uh Susan  Garrett on my podcast because I wanted  an objective measure of successful dog  training and competitors have objective  measures so she was in a dog agility  Champion for many years which has a lot  of metrics so anyway I had herons people  are interested but the  the the tip that I got from one dog  trainer early on because I was trying to  train Molly and I was using just some of  her kibble I'd like put some kibble in a  bag and carry it around and she was like  what are you doing and I said what do  you mean what am I doing she's like is  that kibble I'm like yeah it's kibble  and she goes she's like hey pal she's  like you're at a crowded bar you got a  tip with 20s to get your dogs attention  you take your lovely to the dog park  it's like squirrels other dogs grass  piss on the pavement whatever it happens  to be you have to have good treats so if  your dog isn't responding chances are  maybe you're trying to tip with singles  I love it I love it  well thank you for sharing the roles you  see yourself in and the ones that you'd  like to  step into more uh I certainly feel I  have the jurisdiction to say that you  are an exceptional experimentalist and a  phenomenal teacher we've seen this  across so many you're welcome and and  I'm not just speaking for myself I'm  sleeping speaking for so many other  people as well I mean we've seen this  across so many domains it's like  blogging podcasting book writing  stage lecturing being a guest on a  podcast you know and on and on and um in  terms of the roles that you want to  expand into more I I can't wait to see  the illustrations that that emerge yeah  please do uh grow that flame because I  I'm excited for what comes out um [ __ ]  punch being  um just the first of them leading the  charge yeah  um and uh  you know  I can say because I know uh because I  have one and because I um uh I've  observed many uh kids and friends uh who  are fathers you're gonna be an  exceptional father  I'm absolutely confident of that thanks  man yeah I appreciate that yeah  and I want to say thanks for taking the  time to talk with me today I've been  looking forward to this so much my team  knows this wait we were sort of buzzing  like yeah we've had some Heavy Hitters  on this podcast you know uh we only look  to the top one percent in field and  they're you know incredibly credentialed  by whatever standards we happen to be  exploring and they have to be people  that I really want to talk to so  um I have so much respect for what you  do and the way you do it uh you've  certainly inspired me this podcast would  not exist I don't think the genre of  podcasting would exist and look the way  that it does had you not made the  decision to start podcasting and  um in anticipation of this episode I did  put out a ping on Twitter for questions  and there were many many of them  um that maybe we'll do a q a sometime  maybe not who knows but you know one of  the questions that really stood out to  me was you know how does Tim feel about  all these other people coming into all  the spaces that he's worked and doing  um successful work that builds off so  much of what he's done and uh I'll let  you answer but for me I can say that  um I've been positively inspired and  built so much of what we've been doing  here and  um and what I think about based on the  ways that you've podcasted and  communicate with the public and maintain  your stance and integrity in the way  that you interact with people it's  really inspiring and you've always been  so gracious to me and so humble and so  giving and um and at the same time I  know there's a fierce guy in there who  likes to get it done so once again  thanks for being first man in thanks for  taking on all the roles that you have  and that you are and that you will and  thanks for being a giver we all benefit  thanks Andrew  uh I really appreciate you saying all  that and  I want people to just get after it take  things seriously have fun and be really  really good so watching for instance  what you've done which has been so  spectacular so well executed  makes me super happy and I don't view  anyone as competition  uh in the podcasting world for instance  in the book world I don't view it that  way either  and  I just hope that people keep  experimenting pushing the envelope  and if people aren't say getting better  over time if people aren't following who  are substantially better than me in all  of these ways  uh then I would be super disappointed so  every time I see someone doing something  really impressive or doing something I  never would have thought of I get so  extremely excited I find it really fun  to watch so  appreciate you also  just getting out there and hard charging  and taking your podcast as seriously as  you do I mean I've seen the notes I've  seen the setup I met the team  it's it's very inspiring for me also  makes me want to dust off my cleats and  get back on the field so man you've  never left the field and you've had a  hand in it all so thank you so much and  um hope you'll come back and visit us  again here yeah I hope so it's been a  real pleasure I've been looking forward  to this for a long time as well and I  appreciate you inviting me on  until next time till next time man thank  you for joining me for today's  discussion with Tim Ferriss I hope you  found it to be as informative and as  actionable as I did for links to Tim's  books as well as for a link to his  weekly blog please see the show note  captions you'll also find a link to  Tim's podcast the Tim Ferriss podcast  and I highly recommend that you  subscribe and listen to the Tim Ferriss  podcast  if you're learning from and or enjoying  this podcast please subscribe to our  YouTube channel that's a terrific zero  cost way to support us in addition  please subscribe to the podcast on both  Spotify and apple and on both Spotify  and apple you can leave us up to a five  star review  if you have questions for me or comments  about the podcast or guests that you'd  like me to include on the huberman Lab  podcast please put those in the comments  section on YouTube I do read all the  comments please also check out the  sponsors mentioned at the beginning and  throughout today's episode that's the  best way to support this podcast not on  today's episode but on many previous  episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we  discuss supplements while supplements  aren't necessary for everybody many  people derive tremendous benefit from  them for things like enhancing sleep for  hormone support and for Focus the  uberman Lab podcast is proud to have  partnered with momentous supplements to  see the supplements discussed on the  huberman Lab podcast go to live  momentous spelled ous so that's  livemomentis.com huberman again that's  livemomentous.com huberman if you're not  already following us on social media I  am huberman lab on Instagram Twitter  Facebook and Linkedin and at all those  places I discuss science and science  related tools some of which overlaps  with the content of the huberman Lab  podcast but much of which often does not  overlap with the content of the human  Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab  on all social media Platforms in  addition if you haven't subscribed to  our neural network newsletter it's a  zero cost monthly newsletter that  provides summaries of podcast episodes  as well as tool kits for instance  toolkits for optimizing sleep or  toolkits for Learning and  neuroplasticity or for deliberate cold  exposure for dopamine and on and on to  sign up for the neural network  newsletter simply go to hubermanlab.com  go to the menu scroll down to newsletter  and provide your email we do not share  your email with anybody thank you once  again for joining me for today's  discussion with Tim Ferriss and last but  certainly not least thank you for your  interest in science  [Music]